
_1
For a Picture of
St. Dorothea_

I BEAR a basket lined with grass;
I am so light, I am so fair,
That men must wonder as I pass
And at the basket that I bear,
Where in a newly-drawn green litter
Sweet flowers I carry,--sweets for bitter.

Lilies I shew you, lilies none,
None in Caesar's gardens blow,--
And a quince in hand,--not one
Is set upon your boughs below;
Not set, because their buds not spring;
Spring not, 'cause world is wintering.

But these were found in the East and South
Where Winter is the clime forgot.--
The dewdrop on the larkspur's mouth
O should it then be quenchËd not?
In starry water-meads they drew
These drops: which be they? stars or dew?

Had she a quince in hand? Yet gaze:
Rather it is the sizing moon.
Lo, linked heavens with milky ways!
That was her larkspur row.--So soon?
Sphered so fast, sweet soul?--We see
Nor fruit, nor flowers, nor Dorothy.


_2
Heaven--Haven
A nun takes the veil_

   I HAVE desired to go
     Where springs not fail,
To fields where flies no sharp and sided hail
   And a few lilies blow.

   And I have asked to be
     Where no storms come,
Where the green swell is in the havens dumb,
   And out of the swing of the sea.

_3
The Habit of Perfection_

ELECTED Silence, sing to me
And beat upon my whorlËd ear,
Pipe me to pastures still and be
The music that I care to hear.

Shape nothing, lips; be lovely-dumb:
It is the shut, the curfew sent
From there where all surrenders come
Which only makes you eloquent.

Be shellËd, eyes, with double dark
And find the uncreated light:
This ruck and reel which you remark
Coils, keeps, and teases simple sight.

Palate, the hutch of tasty lust,
Desire not to be rinsed with wine:
The can must be so sweet, the crust
So fresh that come in fasts divine!

Nostrils, your careless breath that spend
Upon the stir and keep of pride,
What relish shall the censers send
Along the sanctuary side!

O feel-of-primrose hands, O feet
That want the yield of plushy sward,
But you shall walk the golden street
And you unhouse and house the Lord.

And, Poverty, be thou the bride
And now the marriage feast begun,
And lily-coloured clothes provide
Your spouse not laboured-at nor spun.



_POEMS 1876-1889_



_4
THE WRECK
OF THE DEUTSCHLAND_

          To the
happy memory of five Franciscan Nuns
   exiles by the Falk Laws
drowned between midnight and morning of
     Dec. 7th. 1875


PART THE FIRST

1
               Thou mastering me
          God! giver of breath and bread;
     World's strand, sway of the sea;
          Lord of living and dead;
   Thou hast bound bones and veins in me, fastened me flesh,
   And after it almost unmade, what with dread,
     Thy doing: and dost thou touch me afresh?
Over again I feel thy finger and find thee.

2
               I did say yes
          O at lightning and lashed rod;
     Thou heardst me truer than tongue confess
          Thy terror, O Christ, O God;
   Thou knowest the walls, altar and hour and night:
   The swoon of a heart that the sweep and the hurl of thee trod
     Hard down with a horror of height:
And the midriff astrain with leaning of, laced with fire of stress.

3
               The frown of his face
          Before me, the hurtle of hell
     Behind, where, where was a, where was a place?
          I whirled out wings that spell
   And fled with a fling of the heart to the heart of the Host.
   My heart, but you were dovewinged, I can tell,
     Carrier-witted, I am bold to boast,
To flash from the flame to the flame then, tower from the grace
     to the grace.

4
               I am soft sift
          In an hourglass--at the wall
     Fast, but mined with a motion, a drift,
          And it crowds and it combs to the fall;
   I steady as a water in a well, to a poise, to a pane,
   But roped with, always, all the way down from the tall
     Fells or flanks of the voel, a vein
Of the gospel proffer, a pressure, a principle, Christ's gift.

5
               I kiss my hand
          To the stars, lovely-asunder
     Starlight, wafting him out of it; and
          Glow, glory in thunder;
   Kiss my hand to the dappled-with-damson west:
   Since, tho' he is under the world's splendour and wonder,
     His mystery must be instressed, stressed;
For I greet him the days I meet him, and bless when I understand.

6
               Not out of his bliss
          Springs the stress felt
     Nor first from heaven (and few know this)
          Swings the stroke dealt--
   Stroke and a stress that stars and storms deliver,
   That guilt is hushed by, hearts are flushed by and melt--
     But it rides time like riding a river
(And here the faithful waver, the faithless fable and miss),

7
               It dates from day
          Of his going in Galilee;
     Warm-laid grave of a womb-life grey;
          Manger, maiden's knee;
   The dense and the driven Passion, and frightful sweat;
   Thence the discharge of it, there its swelling to be,
     Though felt before, though in high flood yet--
What none would have known of it, only the heart, being hard at bay,

8
               Is out with it! Oh,
          We lash with the best or worst
     Word last! How a lush-kept plush-capped sloe
          Will, mouthed to flesh-burst,
   Gush!--flush the man, the being with it, sour or sweet,
   Brim, in a flash, full!--Hither then, last or first,
     To hero of Calvary, Christ,'s feet--
Never ask if meaning it, wanting it, warned of it--men go.

9
               Be adored among men,
          God, three-numberËd form;
     Wring thy rebel, dogged in den,
          Man's malice, with wrecking and storm.
   Beyond saying sweet, past telling of tongue,
   Thou art lightning and love, I found it, a winter and warm;
    Father and fondler of heart thou hast wrung:
Hast thy dark descending and most art merciful then.

10
               With an anvil-ding
          And with fire in him forge thy will
     Or rather, rather then, stealing as Spring
          Through him, melt him but master him still:
   Whether at once, as once at a crash Paul,
   Or as Austin, a lingering-out sweet skill,
     Make mÈrcy in all of us, out of us all
Mastery, but be adored, but be adored King.


_PART THE SECOND_

11
               'Some find me a sword; some
          The flange and the rail; flame,
     Fang, or flood' goes Death on drum,
          And storms bugle his fame.
   But wÈ dream we are rooted in earth--Dust!
   Flesh falls within sight of us, we, though our flower the same,
     Wave with the meadow, forget that there must
The sour scythe cringe, and the blear share come.

12
               On Saturday sailed from Bremen,
          American-outward-bound,
     Take settler and seamen, tell men with women,
          Two hundred souls in the round--
   O Father, not under thy feathers nor ever as guessing
   The goal was a shoal, of a fourth the doom to be drowned;
     Yet did the dark side of the bay of thy blessing
Not vault them, the million of rounds of thy mercy not reeve
     even them in?

13
               Into the snows she sweeps,
          Hurling the haven behind,
     The Deutschland, on Sunday; and so the sky keeps,
          For the infinite air is unkind,
   And the sea flint-flake, black-backed in the regular blow,
   Sitting Eastnortheast, in cursed quarter, the wind;
     Wiry and white-fiery and whirlwind-swivellËd snow
Spins to the widow-making unchilding unfathering deeps.

14
               She drove in the dark to leeward,
          She struck--not a reef or a rock
     But the combs of a smother of sand: night drew her
          Dead to the Kentish Knock;
   And she beat the bank down with her bows and the ride of
     her keel:
   The breakers rolled on her beam with ruinous shock;
     And canvas and compass, the whorl and the wheel
Idle for ever to waft her or wind her with, these she endured.

15
               Hope had grown grey hairs,
          Hope had mourning on,
     Trenched with tears, carved with cares,
          Hope was twelve hours gone;
   And frightful a nightfall folded rueful a day
   Nor rescue, only rocket and lightship, shone,
     And lives at last were washing away:
To the shrouds they took,--they shook in the hurling and
     horrible airs.

16
               One stirred from the rigging to save
          The wild woman-kind below,
     With a rope's end round the man, handy and brave--
          He was pitched to his death at a blow,
   For all his dreadnought breast and braids of thew:
   They could tell him for hours, dandled the to and fro
     Through the cobbled foam-fleece, what could he do
With the burl of the fountains of air, buck and the flood of the wave?

17
               They fought with God's cold--
          And they could not and fell to the deck
     (Crushed them) or water (and drowned them) or rolled
          With the sea-romp over the wreck.
   Night roared, with the heart-break hearing a heart-broke rabble,
   The woman's wailing, the crying of child without check--
     Till a lioness arose breasting the babble,
A prophetess towered in the tumult, a virginal tongue told.

18
               Ah, touched in your bower of bone
          Are you! turned for an exquisite smart,
     Have you! make words break from me here all alone,
          Do you!--mother of being in me, heart.
   O unteachably after evil, but uttering truth,
   Why, tears! is it? tears; such a melting, a madrigal start!
     Never-eldering revel and river of youth,
What can it be, this glee? the good you have there of your own?

19
               Sister, a sister calling
          A master, her master and mine!--
     And the inboard seas run swirling and bawling;
          The rash smart sloggering brine
   Blinds her; but she that weather sees one thing, one;
   Has one fetch in her: she rears herself to divine
     Ears, and the call of the tall nun
To the men in the tops and the tackle rode over the storm's brawling.

20
               She was first of a five and came
          Of a coifËd sisterhood.
     (O Deutschland, double a desperate name!
          O world wide of its good!
   But Gertrude, lily, and Luther, are two of a town,
   Christ's lily and beast of the waste wood:
     From life's dawn it is drawn down,
Abel is Cain's brother and breasts they have sucked the same.)

21
               Loathed for a love men knew in them,
          Banned by the land of their birth,
     Rhine refused them. Thames would ruin them;
          Surf, snow, river and earth
   Gnashed: but thou art above, thou Orion of light;
   Thy unchancelling poising palms were weighing the worth,
     Thou martyr-master: in thy sight
Storm flakes were scroll-leaved flowers, lily showers--sweet
     heaven was astrew in them.

22
               Five! the finding and sake
          And cipher of suffering Christ.
     Mark, the mark is of man's make
          And the word of it Sacrificed.
   But he scores it in scarlet himself on his own bespoken,
   Before-time-taken, dearest prizËd and priced--
     Stigma, signal, cinquefoil token
For lettering of the lamb's fleece, ruddying of the rose-flake.

23
               Joy fall to thee, father Francis,
          Drawn to the Life that died;
     With the gnarls of the nails in thee, niche of the lance, his
          Lovescape crucified
   And seal of his seraph-arrival! and these thy daughters
   And five-livËd and leavËd favour and pride,
     Are sisterly sealed in wild waters,
To bathe in his fall-gold mercies, to breathe in his all-fire glances.

24
               Away in the loveable west,
          On a pastoral forehead of Wales,
     I was under a roof here, I was at rest,
          And they the prey of the gales;
   She to the black-about air, to the breaker, the thickly
   Falling flakes, to the throng that catches and quails,
     Was calling 'O Christ, Christ come quickly':
The cross to her she calls Christ to her, christens her wild-worn Best.

25
               The majesty! what did she mean?
          Breathe, arch and original Breath.
     Is it love in her of the being as her lover had been?
          Breathe, body of lovely Death.
   They were else-minded then, altogether, the men
   Woke thee with a _we are perishlng_ in the weather of Gennesareth.
     Or is it that she cried for the crown then,
The keener to come at the comfort for feeling the combating keen?

26
               For how to the heart's cheering
          The down-dogged ground-hugged grey
     Hovers off, the jay-blue heavens appearing
          Of pied and peeled May!
   Blue-beating and hoary-glow height; or night, still higher,
   With belled fire and the moth-soft Milky Way,
     What by your measure is the heaven of desire,
The treasure never eyesight got, nor was ever guessed what for
     the hearing?

27
               No, but it was not these.
          The jading and jar of the cart,
     Time's tasking, it is fathers that asking for ease
          Of the sodden-with-its-sorrowing heart,
   Not danger, electrical horror; then further it finds
   The appealing of the Passion is tenderer in prayer apart:
     Other, I gather, in measure her mind's
Burden, in wind's burly and beat of endragonËd seas.

28
               But how shall I ... make me room there;
          Reach me a ... Fancy, come faster--
     Strike you the sight of it? look at it loom there,
          Thing that she ... there then! the Master,
   _Ipse_, the only one, Christ, King, Head:
   He was to cure the extremity where he had cast her;
     Do, deal, lord it with living and dead;
Let him ride, her pride, in his triumph, despatch and have done
     with his doom there.

29
               Ah! there was a heart right!
          There was single eye!
     Read the unshapeable shock night
          And knew the who and the why;
   Wording it how but by him that present and past,
   Heaven and earth are word of, worded by?--
     The Simon Peter of a soul! to the blast
Tarpeian-fast, but a blown beacon of light.

30
               Jesu, heart's light,
          Jesu, maid's son,
     What was the feast followed the night
          Thou hadst glory of this nun?
   Feast of the one woman without stain.
   For so conceived, so to conceive thee is done;
     But here was heart-throe, birth of a brain,
Word, that heard and kept thee and uttered thee outright.

31
               Well, she has thee for the pain, for the
          Patience; but pity of the rest of them!
     Heart, go and bleed at a bitterer vein for the
          Comfortless unconfessed of them--
   No not uncomforted: lovely-felicitous Providence
   Finger of a tender of, O of a feathery delicacy, the breast of the
     Maiden could obey so, be a bell to, ring of it, and
Startle the poor sheep back! is the shipwrack then a harvest; does
     tempest carry the grain for thee?

32
               I admire thce, master of the tides,
          Of the Yore-flood, of the year's fall;
     The recurb and the recovery of the gulfs sides,
          The girth of it and the wharf of it and the wall;
   Stanching, quenching ocean of a motionable mind;
   Ground of being, and granite of it: past all
     Grasp God, throned behind
Death with a sovereignty that heeds but hides, bodes but abides;

33
               With a mercy that outrides
          The all of water, an ark
     For the listener; for the lingerer with a love glides
          Lower than death and the dark;
   A vein for the visiting of the past-prayer, pent in prison,
   The-last-breath penitent spirits--the uttermost mark
     Our passion-plungËd giant risen,
The Christ of the Father compassionate, fetched in the storm of
     his strides.

34
               Now burn, new born to the world,
          Doubled-naturËd name,
     The heaven-flung, heart-fleshed, maiden-furled
          Miracle-in-Mary-of-flame,
   Mid-numbered He in three of the thunder-throne!
   Not a dooms-day dazzle in his coming nor dark as he came;
     Kind, but royally reclaiming his own;
A released shower, let flash to the shire, not a lightning of fire
     hard-hurled.

35
               Dame, at our door
          Drowned, and among our shoals,
     Remember us in the roads, the heaven-haven of the
                    Reward:
          Our King back, oh, upon English souls!
   Let him easter in us, be a dayspring to the dimness of us,
     be a crimson-cresseted east,
   More brightening her, rare-dear Britain, as his reign rolls,
     Pride, rose, prince, hero of us, high-priest,
Our hearts' charity's hearth's fire, our thoughts' chivalry's throng's
     Lord.


_5
Penmaen Pool_

_For the Visitors' Book at the Inn_

WHO long for rest, who look for pleasure
Away from counter, court, or school
O where live well your lease of leisure
But here at, here at Penmaen Pool?

You'll dare the Alp? you'll dart the skiff?--
Each sport has here its tackle and tool:
Come, plant the staff by Cadair cliff;
Come, swing the sculls on Penmaen Pool.

What's yonder?--Grizzled Dyphwys dim:
The triple-hummocked Giant's stool,
Hoar messmate, hobs and nobs with him
To halve the bowl of Penmaen Pool.

And all the landscape under survey,
At tranquil turns, by nature's rule,
Rides repeated topsyturvy
In frank, in fairy Penmaen Pool.

And Charles's Wain, the wondrous seven,
And sheep-flock clouds like worlds of wool.
For all they shine so, high in heaven,
Shew brighter shaken in Penmaen Pool.

The Mawddach, how she trips! though throttled
If floodtide teeming thrills her full,
And mazy sands all water-wattled
Waylay her at ebb, past Penmaen Pool.

But what 's to see in stormy weather,
When grey showers gather and gusts are cool?--
Why, raindrop-roundels looped together
That lace the face of Penmaen Pool.

Then even in weariest wintry hour
Of New Year's month or surly Yule
Furred snows, charged tuft above tuft, tower
From darksome darksome Penmaen Pool.

And ever, if bound here hardest home,
You've parlour-pastime left and (who'll
Not honour it?) ale like goldy foam
That frocks an oar in Penmaen Pool.

Then come who pine for peace or pleasure
Away from counter, court, or school,
Spend here your measure of time and treasure
And taste the treats of Penmaen Pool.

_6
The Silver Jubilee:
To James First Bishop of Shrewsbury on the 25th Year
of his Episcopate July 28. 1876_

1
THOUGH no high-hung bells or din
Of braggart bugles cry it in--
   What is sound? Nature's round
Makes the Silver Jubilee.

2
Five and twenty years have run
Since sacred fountains to the sun
   Sprang, that but now were shut,
Showering Silver Jubilee.

3
Feasts, when we shall fall asleep,
Shrewsbury may see others keep;
   None but you this her true,
This her Silver Jubilee.

4
Not today we need lament
Your wealth of life is some way spent:
   Toil has shed round your head
Silver but for Jubilee.

5
Then for her whose velvet vales
Should have pealed with welcome, Wales,
   Let the chime of a rhyme
Utter Silver Jubilee.


_7
God's Grandeur_

THE world is charged with the grandeur of God.
   It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
   It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
   And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with
     toil;
   And wears man's smudge and shares man's smell:
     the soil
Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.

And for all this, nature is never spent;
   There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
And though the last lights off the black West went
   Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
   World broods with warm breast and with ah!
     bright wings.


_8
The Starlight Night_

LOOK at the stars! look, look up at the skies!
   O look at all the fire-folk sitting in the air!
   The bright boroughs, the circle-citadels there!
Down in dim woods the diamond delves! the elves'-eyes!
The grey lawns cold where gold, where quickgold lies!
   Wind-beat whitebeam! airy abeles set on a flare!
   Flake-doves sent floating forth at a farmyard scare!--
Ah well! it is all a purchase, all is a prize.

Buy then! bid then!--What?--Prayer, patience, alms,
     vows.
Look, look: a May-mess, like on orchard boughs!
   Look! March-bloom, like on mealed-with-yellow
     sallows!
These are indeed the barn; withindoors house
The shocks. This piece-bright paling shuts the spouse
   Christ home, Christ and his mother and all his hallows.


_9
Spring_

NOTHING is so beautiful as spring--
   When weeds, in wheels, shoot long and lovely and lush;
   Thrush's eggs look little low heavens, and thrush
Through the echoing timber does so rinse and wring
The ear, it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing;
   The glassy peartree leaves and blooms, they brush
   The descending blue; that blue is all in a rush
With richness; the racing lambs too have fair their fling.

What is all this juice and all this joy?
   A strain of the earth's sweet being in the beginning
In Eden garden. Have, get, before it cloy,
   Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning,
Innocent mind and Mayday in girl and boy,
   Most, O maid's child, thy choice and worthy the
     winning.


_10
The Lantern out of Doors_

SOMETIMES a lantern moves along the night,
   That interests our eyes. And who goes there?
   I think; where from and bound, I wonder, where,
With, all down darkness wide, his wading light?

Men go by me whom either beauty bright
   In mould or mind or what not else makes rare:
   They rain against our much-thick and marsh air
Rich beams, till death or distance buys them quite.

Death or distance soon consumes them: wind
   What most I may eye after, be in at the end
I cannot, and out of sight is out of mind.

Christ minds: Christ's interest, what to avow or amend
   There, Èyes them, heart w·nts, care ha˙nts, foot
     fÛllows kÌnd,
Their r·nsom, thÈir rescue, ·nd first, f·st, last friÈnd.


_11
The Sea and the Skylark_

ON ear and ear two noises too old to end
   Trench--right, the tide that ramps against the shore;
   With a flood or a fall, low lull-off or all roar,
Frequenting there while moon shall wear and wend.

Left hand, off land, I hear the lark ascend,
   His rash-fresh re-winded new-skeinËd score
   In crisps of curl off wild winch whirl, and pour
And pelt music, till none's to spill nor spend.

How these two shame this shallow and frail town!
   How ring right out our sordid turbid time,
Being pure! We, life's pride and cared-for crown,

   Have lost that cheer and charm of earth's past prime:
Our make and making break, are breaking, down
    To man's last dust, drain fast towards man's first slime.


_12
The Windhover:

To Christ our Lord_

I CAUGHT this morning morning's minion, king-
     dom of daylight's dauphin, dapple-dawn-drawn Fal-
          con, in his riding
Of the rolling level underneath him steady air, and
     striding
High there, how he rung upon the rein of a wimpling wing
In his ecstacy! then off, off forth on swing,
     As a skate's heel sweeps smooth on a bow-bend:
          the hurl and gliding
     Rebuffed the big wind. My heart in hiding
Stirred for a bird,--the achieve of, the mastery of the
          thing!

Brute beauty and valour and act, oh, air, pride, plume, here
    Buckle! AND the fire that breaks from thee then, a
          billion
Times told lovelier, more dangerous, O my chevalier!

     No wonder of it: shÈer plÛd makes plough down
          sillion
Shine, and blue-bleak embers, ah my dear,
   Fall, gall themselves, and gash gold-vermillion.


_13
Pied Beauty_

GLORY be to God for dappled things--
   For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow;
      For rose-moles all in stipple upon trout that swim:
Fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls; finches' wings;
   Landscape plotted and pieced--fold, fallow, and
      plough;
     And ‡ll tr‡des, their gear and tackle and trim.

All things counter, original, spare, strange;
   Whatever is fickle, freckled (who knows how?)
      With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim;
He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change:
                  Praise him.


_14
Hurrahing in Harvest_

SUMMER ends now; now, barbarous in beauty, the
     stooks rise
   Around; up above, what wind-walks! what lovely
     behaviour
   Of silk-sack clouds! has wilder, wilful-wavier
Meal-drift moulded ever and melted across skies?

I walk, I lift up, I lift up heart, eyes,
   Down all that glory in the heavens to glean our
     Saviour;
   And, Èyes, he·rt, what looks, what lips yet gave you a
Rapturous love's greeting of realer, of rounder replies?

And the azurous hung hills are his world-wielding
     shoulder
   Majestic--as a stallion stalwart, very-violet-sweet!--
These things, these things were here and but the
     beholder
   Wanting; which two when they once meet,
The heart rears wings bold and bolder
   And hurls for him, O half hurls earth for him off
     under his feet.


_15
Caged Skylark_

As a dare-gale skylark scanted in a dull cage
   Man's mounting spirit in his bone-house, mean house,
     dwells--
   That bird beyond the remembering his free fells;
This in drudgery, day-labouring-out life's age.

Though aloft on turf or perch or poor low stage,
   Both sing sometimes the sweetest, sweetest spells,
   Yet both droop deadly sometimes in their cells
Or wring their barriers in bursts of fear or rage.

Not that the sweet-fowl, song-fowl, needs no rest--
Why, hear him, hear him babble and drop down to his nest,
   But his own nest, wild nest, no prison.

Man's spirit will be flesh-bound when found at best,
But uncumbered: meadow-down is not distressed
   For a rainbow footing it nor he for his bÛnes rÌsen.


_16
In the Valley of the Elwy_

I REMEMBER a house where all were good
   To me, God knows, deserving no such thing:
   Comforting smell breathed at very entering,
Fetched fresh, as I suppose, off some sweet wood.
That cordial air made those kind people a hood
   All over, as a bevy of eggs the mothering wing
   Will, or mild nights the new morsels of spring:
Why, it seemed of course; seemed of right it should.

Lovely the woods, waters, meadows, combes, vales,
All the air things wear that build this world of Wales;
   Only the inmate does not correspond:
God, lover of souls, swaying considerate scales,
Complete thy creature dear O where it fails,
   Being mighty a master, being a father and fond.


_17
The Loss of the Eurydice

Foundered March 24. 1878_

1
THE Eurydice--it concerned thee, O Lord:
Three hundred souls, O alas! on board,
     Some asleep unawakened, all un-
warned, eleven fathoms fallen

2
Where she foundered! One stroke
Felled and furled them, the hearts of oak!
   And flockbells off the aerial
Downs' forefalls beat to the burial.

3
For did she pride her, freighted fully, on
Bounden bales or a hoard of bullion?--
   Precious passing measure,
Lads and men her lade and treasure.

4
She had come from a cruise, training seamen--
Men, boldboys soon to be men:
   Must it, worst weather,
Blast bole and bloom together?

5
No Atlantic squall overwrought her
Or rearing billow of the Biscay water:
   Home was hard at hand
And the blow bore from land.

6
And you were a liar, O blue March day.
Bright sun lanced fire in the heavenly bay;
   But what black Boreas wrecked her? he
Came equipped, deadly-electric,

7
A beetling baldbright cloud thorough England
Riding: there did storms not mingle? and
   Hailropes hustle and grind their
Heavengravel? wolfsnow, worlds of it, wind there?

8
Now Carisbrook keep goes under in gloom;
Now it overvaults Appledurcombe;
   Now near by Ventnor town
It hurls, hurls off Boniface Down.

9
Too proud, too proud, what a press she bore!
Royal, and all her royals wore.
   Sharp with her, shorten sail!
Too late; lost; gone with the gale.

10
This was that fell capsize,
As half she had righted and hoped to rise
   Death teeming in by her portholes
Raced down decks, round messes of mortals.

11
Then a lurch forward, frigate and men;
'All hands for themselves' the cry ran then;
   But she who had housed them thither
Was around them, bound them or wound them with her.

12
Marcus Hare, high her captain,
Kept to her--care-drowned and wrapped in
   Cheer's death, would follow
His charge through the champ-white water-in-a-wallow.

13
All under Channel to bury in a beach her
Cheeks: Right, rude of feature,
   He thought he heard say
'Her commander! and thou too, and thou this way.'

14
It is even seen, time's something server,
In mankind's medley a duty-swerver,
   At downright 'No or yes?'
Doffs all, drives full for righteousness.

15
Sydney Fletcher, Bristol-bred,
(Low lie his mates now on watery bed)
   Takes to the seas and snows
As sheer down the ship goes.

16
Now her afterdraught gullies him too down;
Now he wrings for breath with the deathgush brown;
   Till a lifebelt and God's will
Lend him a lift from the sea-swill.

17
Now he shoots short up to the round air;
Now he gasps, now he gazes everywhere;
   But his eye no cliff, no coast or
Mark makes in the rivelling snowstorm.

18
Him, after an hour of wintry waves,
A schooner sights, with another, and saves,
   And he boards her in Oh! such joy
He has lost count what came next, poor boy.--

19
They say who saw one sea-corpse cold
He was all of lovely manly mould,
   Every inch a tar,
Of the best we boast our sailors are.

20
Look, foot to forelock, how all things suit! he
Is strung by duty, is strained to beauty,
   And brown-as-dawning-skinned
With brine and shine and whirling wind.

21
O his nimble finger, his gnarled grip!
Leagues, leagues of seamanship
   Slumber in these forsaken
Bones, this sinew, and will not waken.

22
He was but one like thousands more,
Day and night I deplore
   My people and born own nation,
Fast foundering own generation,

23
I might let bygones be--our curse
Of ruinous shrine no hand or, worse,
   Robbery's hand is busy to
Dress, hoar-hallowËd shrines unvisited;

24
Only the breathing temple and fleet
Life, this wildworth blown so sweet,
   These daredeaths, ay this crew, in
Unchrist, all rolled in ruin--

25
Deeply surely I need to deplore it,
Wondering why my master bore it,
   The riving off that race
So at home, time was, to his truth and grace

26
That a starlight-wender of ours would say
The marvellous Milk was Walsingham Way
   And one--but let be, let be:
More, more than was will yet be.--

27
O well wept, mother have lost son;
Wept, wife; wept, sweetheart would be one:
   Though grief yield them no good
Yet shed what tears sad truelove should.

28
But to Christ lord of thunder
Crouch; lay knee by earth low under:
   'Holiest, loveliest, bravest,
Save my hero, O Hero savest.

29
And the prayer thou hearst me making
Have, at the awful overtaking,
   Heard; have heard and granted
Grace that day grace was wanted.'

30
Not that hell knows redeeming,
But for souls sunk in seeming
   Fresh, till doomfire burn all,
Prayer shall fetch pity eternal.


_18
The May Magnificat_

MAY is Mary's month, and I
Muse at that and wonder why:
     Her feasts follow reason,
     Dated due to season--

Candlemas, Lady Day;
But the Lady Month, May,
     Why fasten that upon her,
     With a feasting in her honour?

Is it only its being brighter
Than the most are must delight her?
     Is it opportunest
     And flowers finds soonest?

Ask of her, the mighty mother:
Her reply puts this other
     Question: What is Spring?--
     Growth in every thing--

Flesh and fleece, fur and feather,
Grass and green world all together;
     Star-eyed strawberry-breasted
     Throstle above her nested

Cluster of bugle blue eggs thin
Forms and warms the life within;
     And bird and blossom swell
     In sod or sheath or shell.

All things rising, all things sizing
Mary sees, sympathising
     With that world of good,
     Nature's motherhood.

Their magnifying of each its kind
With delight calls to mind
     How she did in her stored
     Magnify the Lord.

Well but there was more than this:
Spring's universal bliss
     Much, had much to say
     To offering Mary May.

When drop-of-blood-and-foam-dapple
Bloom lights the orchard-apple
     And thicket and thorp are merry
     With silver-surfËd cherry

And azuring-over greybell makes
Wood banks and brakes wash wet like lakes
     And magic cuckoocall
     Caps, clears, and clinches all--

This ecstacy all through mothering earth
Tells Mary her mirth till Christ's birth
     To remember and exultation
     In God who was her salvation.


_19
Binsey Poplars

felled 1879_

MY aspens dear, whose airy cages quelled,
Quelled or quenched in leaves the leaping sun,
All felled, felled, are all felled;
   Of a fresh and following folded rank
               Not spared, not one
               That dandled a sandalled
          Shadow that swam or sank
On meadow and river and wind-wandering weed-winding
   bank.

O if we but knew what we do
      When we delve or hew--
Hack and rack the growing green!
      Since country is so tender
To touch, her being sÛ slender,
That, like this sleek and seeing ball
But a prick will make no eye at all,
Where we, even where we mean
          To mend her we end her,
      When we hew or delve:
After-comers cannot guess the beauty been.
   Ten or twelve, only ten or twelve
      Strokes of havoc ˙nselve
          The sweet especial scene,
      Rural scene, a rural scene,
      Sweet especial rural scene.


_20
Duns Scotus's Oxford_

TOWERY city and branchy between towers;
Cuckoo-echoing, bell-swarmËd, lark-charmËd, rook-
     racked, river-rounded;
The dapple-eared lily below thee; that country and
     town did
Once encounter in, here coped and poisËd powers;

Thou hast a base and brickish skirt there, sours
That neighbour-nature thy grey beauty is grounded
Best in; graceless growth, thou hast confounded
Rural rural keeping--folk, flocks, and flowers.

Yet ah! this air I gather and I release
He lived on; these weeds and waters, these walls are what
He haunted who of all men most sways my spirits to peace;

Of realty the rarest-veinËd unraveller; a not
Rivalled insight, be rival Italy or Greece;
Who fired France for Mary without spot.


_21
Henry Purcell_

_The poet wishes well to the divine genius of Purcell
and praises him that, whereas other musicians have given
utterance to the moods of man's mind, he has, beyond
that, uttered in notes the very make and species of man as
created both in him and in all men generally._

HAVE fair fallen, O fair, fair have fallen, so dear
To me, so arch-especial a spirit as heaves in Henry Purcell,
An age is now since passed, since parted; with the reversal
Of the outward sentence low lays him, listed to a heresy,
     here.

Not mood in him nor meaning, proud fire or sacred fear,
Or love or pity or all that sweet notes not his might nursle:
It is the forgËd feature finds me; it is the rehearsal
Of own, of abrupt self there so thrusts on, so throngs
     the ear.

Let him Oh! with his air of angels then lift me, lay me!
     only I'll
Have an eye to the sakes of him, quaint moonmarks, to
     his pelted plumage under
Wings: so some great stormfowl, whenever he has walked
     his while

The thunder-purple seabeach plumË purple-of-thunder,
If a wuthering of his palmy snow-pinions scatter a
     colossal smile
Off him, but meaning motion fans fresh our wits with
     wonder.


_22
Peace_

WHEN will you ever, Peace, wild wooddove, shy wings shut,
Your round me roaming end, and under be my boughs?
When, when, PeacË, will you, Peace? I'll not play
     hypocrite
To own my heart: I yield you do come sometimes; but
That piecemeal peace is poor peace. What pure peace
     allows
Alarms of wars, the daunting wars, the death of it?

O surely, reaving Peace, my Lord should leave in lieu
Some good! And so he does leave Patience exquisite,
That plumes to Peace thereafter. And when Peace here
     does house
He comes with work to do, he does not come to coo,
He comes to brood and sit.


_23
The Bugler's First Communion

A BUGLER boy from barrack (it is over the hill
There)--boy bugler, born, he tells me, of Irish
          Mother to an English sire (he
Shares their best gifts surely, fall how things will),

This very very day came down to us after a boon he on
My late being there begged of me, overflowing
          Boon in my bestowing,
Came, I say, this day to it--to a First Communion.

Here he knelt then Ìn regimental red.
Forth Christ from cupboard fetched, how fain I of feet
          To his youngster take his treat!
Low-latched in leaf-light housel his too huge godhead.

There! and your sweetest sendings, ah divine,
By it, heavens, befall him! as a heart Christ's darling,
     dauntless;
          Tongue true, vaunt- and tauntless;
Breathing bloom of a chastity in mansex fine.

Frowning and forefending angel-warder
Squander the hell-rook ranks sally to molest him;
          March, kind comrade, abreast him;
Dress his days to a dexterous and starlight order.

How it dÛes my heart good, visiting at that bleak hill,
When limber liquid youth, that to all I teach
          Yields tender as a pushed peach,
Hies headstrong to its wellbeing of a self-wise self-will!

Then though I should tread tufts of consolation
D·ys ·fter, sÛ I in a sort deserve to
          And do serve God to serve to
Just such slips of soldiery Christ's royal ration.

Nothing Èlse is like it, no, not all so strains
Us: fresh youth fretted in a bloomfall all portending
          That sweet's sweeter ending;
Realm both Christ is heir to and thÈre rÈigns.

O now well work that sealing sacred ointment!
O for now charms, arms, what bans off bad
          And locks love ever in a lad!
Let mÈ though see no more of him, and not disappointment

Those sweet hopes quell whose least me quickenings lift.
In scarlet or somewhere of some day seeing
          That brow and bead of being,
An our day's God's own Galahad. Though this child's
     drift

Seems by a divÌne doom ch·nnelled, nor do I cry
Disaster there; but may he not rankle and roam
          In backwheels though bound home?--
That left to the Lord of the Eucharist, I here lie by;

Recorded only, I have put my lips on pleas
Would brandle adamantine heaven with ride and jar, did
          Prayer go disregarded:
Forward-like, but however, and like favourable heaven
   heard these.


_24
Morning Midday and Evening Sacrifice_

THE dappled die-away
Cheek and wimpled lip,
The gold-wisp, the airy-grey
Eye, all in fellowship--
This, all this beauty blooming,
This, all this freshness fuming,
Give God while worth consuming.

Both thought and thew now bolder
And told by Nature: Tower;
Head, heart, hand, heel, and shoulder
That beat and breathe in power--
This pride of prime's enjoyment
Take as for tool, not toy meant
And hold at Christ's employment.

The vault and scope and schooling
And mastery in the mind,
In silk-ash kept from cooling,
And ripest under rind--
What life half lifts the latch of,
What hell stalks towards the snatch of,
Your offering, with despatch, of!

_25
Andromeda_

Now Time's Andromeda on this rock rude,
With not her either beauty's equal or
Her injury's, looks off by both horns of shore,
Her flower, her piece of being, doomed dragon's food.
   Time past she has been attempted and pursued
By many blows and banes; but now hears roar
A wilder beast from West than all were, more
Rife in her wrongs, more lawless, and more lewd.

   Her Perseus linger and leave her tÛ her extremes?--
Pillowy air he treads a time and hangs
His thoughts on her, forsaken that she seems,
   All while her patience, morselled into pangs,
Mounts; then to alight disarming, no one dreams,
With Gorgon's gear and barebill, thongs and fangs.


_26
The Candle Indoors_

SOME candle clear burns somewhere I come by.
I muse at how its being puts blissful back
With yellowy moisture mild night's blear-all black,
Or to-fro tender trambeams truckle at the eye.
By that window what task what fingers ply,
I plod wondering, a-wanting, just for lack
Of answer the eagerer a-wanting Jessy or Jack
There   God to aggr·ndise, God to glorify.--

Come you indoors, come home; your fading fire
Mend first and vital candle in close heart's vault:
You there are master, do your own desire;
What hinders? Are you beam-blind, yet to a fault
In a neighbour deft-handed? Are you that liar
And cast by conscience out, spendsavour salt?


_27
The Handsome Heart:

at a Gracious Answer_

'BUT tell me, child, your choice; what shall I buy
You?'--'Father, what you buy me I like best.'
With the sweetest air that said, still plied and pressed,
He swung to his first poised purport of reply.

What the heart is! which, like carriers let fly--
Doff darkness, homing nature knows the rest--
To its own fine function, wild and self-instressed,
Falls light as ten years long taught how to and why.

Mannerly-hearted! more than handsome face--
Beauty's bearing or muse of mounting vein,
All, in this case, bathed in high hallowing grace . . .

Of heaven what boon to buy you, boy, or gain
Not granted?--Only ... O on that path you pace
Run all your race, O brace sterner that strain!


_28

At the Wedding March_

GOD with honour hang your head,
Groom, and grace you, bride, your bed
With lissome scions, sweet scions,
Out of hallowed bodies bred.

Each be other's comfort kind:
DÈep, dÈeper than divined,
Divine charity, dear charity,
Fast you ever, fast bind.

Then let the March tread our ears:
I to him turn with tears
Who to wedlock, his wonder wedlock,
DÈals trÌumph and immortal years.


_29
Felix Randal_

FELIX RANDAL the farrier, O he is dead then? my duty all ended,
Who have watched his mould of man, big-boned and hardy-
     handsome
Pining, pining, till time when reason rambled in it and some
Fatal four disorders, fleshed there, all contended?

Sickness broke him. Impatient he cursed at first, but mended
Being anointed and all; though a heavenlier heart began some
Months earlier, since I had our sweet reprieve and ransom
Tendered to him. Ah well, God rest him all road ever he
     offended!

This seeing the sick endears them to us, us too it endears.
My tongue had taught thee comfort, touch had quenched thy tears,
Thy tears that touched my heart, child, Felix, poor Felix Randal;

How far from then forethought of, all thy more boisterous years,
When thou at the random grim forge, powerful amidst peers,
Didst fettle for the great grey drayhorse his bright and battering
     sandal!


_30
Brothers_

How lovely the elder brother's
Life all laced in the other's,
LÛve-laced! what once I well
Witnessed; so fortune fell.
When Shrovetide, two years gone,      5
Our boys' plays brought on
Part was picked for John,
Young JÛhn: then fear, then joy
Ran revel in the elder boy.
Their night was come now; all        10
Our company thronged the hall;
Henry, by the wall,
Beckoned me beside him:
I came where called, and eyed him
By meanwhiles; making m˝ play        15
Turn most on tender byplay.
For, wrung all on love's rack,
My lad, and lost in Jack,
Smiled, blushed, and bit his lip;
Or drove, with a diver's dip,        20
Clutched hands down through clasped knees--
Truth's tokens tricks like these,
Old telltales, with what stress
He hung on the imp's success.
Now the other was br·ss-bÛld:        25
HÈ had no work to hold
His heart up at the strain;
Nay, roguish ran the vein.
Two tedious acts were past;
Jack's call and cue at last;         30
When Henry, heart-forsook,
Dropped eyes and dared not look.
Eh, how ·ll r˙ng!
Young dog, he did give tongue!
But Harry--in his hands he has flung 35
His tear-tricked cheeks of flame
For fond love and for shame.
   Ah Nature, framed in fault,
There 's comfort then, there 's salt;
Nature, bad, base, and blind,        40
Dearly thou canst be kind;
There dearly thÈn, de·rly,
I'll cry thou canst be kind.


_31
Spring and Fall:

to a young child_

M¡RGAR…T, ·re you grÌeving
Over Goldengrove unleaving?
Le·ves, like the things of man, you
With your fresh thoughts care for, can you?
¡h! ·s the heart grows older
It will come to such sights colder
By and by, nor spare a sigh
Though worlds of wanwood leafmeal lie;
And yet you wÌll weep and know why.
Now no matter, child, the name:
SÛrrow's sprÌngs ·re the same.
Nor mouth had, no nor mind, expressed
What heart heard of, ghost guessed:
It is the blight man was born for,
It is Margaret you mourn for.


_32
Spelt from Sibyl's Leaves_

EARNEST, earthless, equal, attuneable, | vaulty, voluminous, . .
     stupendous
Evening strains to be tÌme's v·st, | womb-of-all, home-of-all,
     hearse-of-all night.
Her fond yellow hornlight wound to the west, | her wild hollow
     hoarlight hung to the height
Waste; her earliest stars, earl-stars, | st·rs principal, overbend us,
FÌre-fÈaturing heaven. For earth | her being has unbound, her
     dapple is at an end, as-
tray or aswarm, all throughther, in throngs; | self Ìn self steepËd
     and pashed--q˙ite
Disremembering, dÌsmembering | ‡ll now. Heart, you round me
     right
With: ”ur Èvening is over us; Ûur night | whÈlms, whÈlms, ·nd
     will end us.
Only the beak-leaved boughs dragonish | damask the tool-smooth
     bleak light; black,
Ever so black on it. ”ur tale, Ûur oracle! | LÈt life, w·ned,
     ah lÈt life wind
Off hÈr once skÈined stained vÈined varÌety | upon, ·ll on twÛ
     spools; p·rt, pen, p·ck
Now her ·ll in twÛ flocks, twÛ folds--black, white; | right,
     wrong; reckon but, reck but, mind
But thÈse two; w·re of a wÛrld where b˙t these | twÛ tell, each
     off the Ûther; of a rack
Where, selfwrung, selfstrung, sheathe- and shelterless, | thÛughts
     agaÌnst thoughts Ìn groans grÌnd.


_33
Inversnaid_

THIS darksome burn, horseback brown,
His rollrock highroad roaring down,
In coop and in comb the fleece of his foam
Flutes and low to the lake falls home.

A windpuff-bonnet of f·awn-frÛth
Turns and twindles over the broth
Of a pool so pitchblack, fÈll-frÛwning,
It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.

Degged with dew, dappled with dew
Are the groins of the braes that the brook treads through,
Wiry heathpacks, flitches of fern,
And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.

What would the world be, once bereft
Of wet and of wildness? Let them be left,
O let them be left, wildness and wet;
Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.


_34

As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies dr·w flame;
As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell's
Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
Selves--goes itself; _myself_ it speaks and spells,
Crying _Wh·t I do is me: for that I came._

Õ say mÛre: the just man justices;
KÈeps grace: th·t keeps all his goings graces;
Acts in God's eye what in God's eye he is--
ChrÌst--for Christ plays in ten thousand places,
Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
To the Father through the features of men's faces.


_35
Ribblesdale_

EARTH, sweet Earth, sweet landscape, with leavËs throng
And louchËd low grass, heaven that dost appeal
To, with no tongue to plead, no heart to feel;
That canst but only be, but dost that long--

Thou canst but be, but that thou well dost; strong
Thy plea with him who dealt, nay does now deal,
Thy lovely dale down thus and thus bids reel
Thy river, and o'er gives all to rack or wrong.

   And what is Earth's eye, tongue, or heart else, where
Else, but in dear and dogged man?--Ah, the heir
To his own selfbent so bound, so tied to his turn,
To thriftless reave both our rich round world bare
And none reck of world after, this bids wear
Earth brows of such care, care and dear concern.


_36
The Leaden Echo and the Golden Echo

(Maidens' song from St. Winefred's Well)_

THE LEADEN ECHO

How to keep--is there ·ny any, is there none such, nowhere
     known some, bow or brooch or braid or brace, l·ce, latch
     or catch or key to keep
Back beauty, keep it, beauty, beauty, beauty, . . . from vanishing
     away?

 ” is there no frowning of these wrinkles, rankËd wrinkles deep,
DÛwn? no waving off of these most mournful messengers, still
     messengers, sad and stealing messengers of grey?
No there's none, there's none, O no there's none,
Nor can you long be, what you now are, called fair,
Do what you may do, what, do what you may,
And wisdom is early to despair:
Be beginning; since, no, nothing can be done
To keep at bay
Age and age's evils, hoar hair,
Ruck and wrinkle, drooping, dying, death's worst, winding
     sheets, tombs and worms and tumbling to decay;
So be beginning, be beginning to despair.
O there's none; no no no there's none:
Be beginning to despair, to despair,
Despair, despair, despair, despair.


THE GOLDEN ECHO

         Spare!
There is one, yes I have one (Hush there!);
Only not within seeing of the sun,
Not within the singeing of the strong sun,
Tall sun's tingeing, or treacherous the tainting of the earth's air.
Somewhere elsewhere there is ah well where! one,
”ne. Yes I can tell such a key, I do know such a place,
Where whatever's prized and passes of us, everything that's
     fresh and fast flying of us, seems to us sweet of us and
     swiftly away with, done away with, undone,
Undone, done with, soon done with, and yet dearly and
     dangerously sweet
Of us, the wimpled-water-dimpled, not-by-morning-matchËd face,
The flower of beauty, fleece of beauty, too too apt to, ah! to fleet,
Never fleets more, fastened with the tenderest truth
To its own best being and its loveliness of youth: it is an ever-
     lastingness of, O it is an all youth!
Come then, your ways and airs and looks, locks, maiden gear,
     gallantry and gaiety and grace,
Winning ways, airs innocent, maiden manners, sweet looks,
     loose locks, long locks, lovelocks, gaygear, going gallant,
     girlgrace--
Resign them, sign them, seal them, send them, motion them
     with breath,
And with sighs soaring, soaring sÌghs deliver
Them; beauty-in-the-ghost, deliver it, early now, long before
     death
Give beauty back, beauty, beauty, beauty, back to God, beauty's
     self and beauty's giver.
See; not a hair is, not an eyelash, not the least lash lost; every hair
Is, hair of the head, numbered.
Nay, what we had lighthanded left in surly the mere mould
Will have waked and have waxed and have walked with the wind
     what while we slept,
This side, that side hurling a heavyheaded hundredfold
What while we, while we slumbered.
O then, weary then wh˝ should we tread? O why are we so
     haggard at the heart, so care-coiled, care-killed, so fagged,
     so fashed, so cogged, so cumbered,
When the thing we freely fÛrfeit is kept with fonder a care,
Fonder a care kept than we could have kept it, kept
Far with fonder a care (and we, we should have lost it) finer, fonder
A care kept. Where kept? Do but tell us where kept, where.--
Yonder.--What high as that! We follow, now we follow.--
     Yonder, yes yonder, yonder,
Yonder.


_37
The Blessed Virgin compared to the Air we
Breathe_

WILD air, world-mothering air,
Nestling me everywhere,
That each eyelash or hair
Girdles; goes home betwixt
The fleeciest, frailest-flixed
Snowflake; that's fairly mixed
With, riddles, and is rife
In every least thing's life;
This needful, never spent,
And nursing element;             10
My more than meat and drink,
My meal at every wink;
This air, which, by life's law,
My lung must draw and draw
Now but to breathe its praise,
Minds me in many ways
Of her who not only
Gave God's infinity
Dwindled to infancy
Welcome in womb and breast,      20
Birth, milk, and all the rest
But mothers each new grace
That does now reach our race--
Mary Immaculate,
Merely a woman, yet
Whose presence, power is
Great as no goddess's
Was deemËd, dreamËd; who
This one work has to do--
Let all God's glory through,     30
God's glory which would go
Through her and from her flow
Off, and no way but so.

     I say that we are wound
With mercy round and round
As if with air: the same
Is Mary, more by name.
She, wild web, wondrous robe,
Mantles the guilty globe,
Since God has let dispense       40
Her prayers his providence:
Nay, more than almoner,
The sweet alms' self is her
And men are meant to share
Her life as life does air.
     If I have understood,
She holds high motherhood
Towards all our ghostly good
And plays in grace her part
About man's beating heart,       50
Laying, like air's fine flood,
The deathdance in his blood;
Yet no part but what will
Be Christ our Saviour still.
Of her flesh he took flesh:
He does take fresh and fresh,
Though much the mystery how,
Not flesh but spirit now
And makes, O marvellous!
New Nazareths in us,             60
Where she shall yet conceive
Him, morning, noon, and eve;
New Bethlems, and he born
There, evening, noon, and morn
Bethlem or Nazareth,
Men here may draw like breath
More Christ and baffle death;
Who, born so, comes to be
New self and nobler me
In each one and each one         70
More makes, when all is done,
Both God's and Mary's Son.
     Again, look overhead
How air is azurËd;
O how! nay do but stand
Where you can lift your hand
Skywards: rich, rich it laps
Round the four fingergaps.
Yet such a sapphire-shot,
Charged, steepËd sky will not    80
Stain light. Yea, mark you this:
It does no prejudice.
The glass-blue days are those
When every colour glows,
Each shape and shadow shows.
Blue be it: this blue heaven
The seven or seven times seven
Hued sunbeam will transmit
Perfect, not alter it.
Or if there does some soft,      90
On things aloof, aloft,
Bloom breathe, that one breath more
Earth is the fairer for.
Whereas did air not make
This bath of blue and slake
His fire, the sun would shake,
A blear and blinding ball
With blackness bound, and all
The thick stars round him roll
Flashing like flecks of coal,   100
Quartz-fret, or sparks of salt,
In grimy vasty vault.
     So God was god of old:
A mother came to mould
Those limbs like ours which are
What must make our daystar
Much dearer to mankind;
Whose glory bare would blind
Or less would win man's mind.
Through her we may see him      110
Made sweeter, not made dim,
And her hand leaves his light
Sifted to suit our sight.
     Be thou then, thou dear
Mother, my atmosphere;
My happier world, wherein
To wend and meet no sin;
Above me, round me lie
Fronting my froward eye
With sweet and scarless sky;    120
Stir in my ears, speak there
Of God's love, O live air,
Of patience, penance, prayer:
World-mothering air, air wild,
Wound with thee, in thee isled,
Fold home, fast fold thy child.


_38
To what serves Mortal Beauty?_

To what serves mortal beauty | dangerous; does set danc-
ing blood the O-seal-that-so | feature, flung prouder form
Than Purcell tune lets tread to? | See: it does this: keeps warm
Men's wits to the things that are; | what good means--where a glance
Master more may than gaze, | gaze out of countenance.
Those lovely lads once, wet-fresh | windfalls of war's storm,
How then should Gregory, a father, | have gleanËd else from swarm-
ed Rome? But God to a nation | dealt that day's dear chance.
   To man, that needs would worship | block or barren stone,
Our law says: Love what are | love's worthiest, were all known;
World's loveliest--men's selves. Self | flashes off frame and face.
What do then? how meet beauty? | Merely meet it; own,
Home at heart, heaven's sweet gift; | then leave, let that alone.
Yea, wish that though, wish all, | God's better beauty, grace.


_39
(The Soldier)_

YES. Wh˝ do we ·ll, seeing of a soldier, bless him? bless
Our redcoats, our tars? Both these being, the greater part,
But frail clay, nay but foul clay. Here it is: the heart,
Since, proud, it calls the calling manly, gives a guess
That, hopes that, makesbelieve, the men must be no less;
It fancies, feigns, deems, dears the artist after his art;
And fain will find as sterling all as all is smart,
And scarlet wear the spirit of w·r thÈre express.

Mark Christ our King. He knows war, served this soldiering
     through;
He of all can handle a rope best. There he bides in bliss
Now, and sÈeing somewhÈre some m·n do all that man can do,
For love he leans forth, needs his neck must fall on, kiss,
And cry 'O Christ-done deed! So God-made-flesh does too:
Were I come o'er again' cries Christ 'it should be this'.


_40
(Carrion Comfort)_

NOT, I'll not, carrion comfort, Despair, not feast on thee;
Not untwist--slack they may be--these last strands of man
In me Ûr, most weary, cry _I can no more_. I can;
Can something, hope, wish day come, not choose not to be.
But ah, but O thou terrible, why wouldst thou rude on me
Thy wring-world right foot rock? lay a lionlimb against
     me? scan
With darksome devouring eyes my bruisËd bones? and fan,
O in turns of tempest, me heaped there; me frantic to
     avoid thee and flee?

Why? That my chaff might fly; my grain lie, sheer
     and clear.
Nay in all that toil, that coil, since (seems) I kissed the rod,
Hand rather, my heart lo! lapped strength, stole joy,
     would laugh, chÈer.
Cheer whom though? the hero whose heaven-handling
     flung me, fÛot trÛd
Me? or me that fought him? O which one? is it each
     one? That night, that year
Of now done darkness I wretch lay wrestling with (my
     God!) my God.


_41_

No worst, there is none. Pitched past pitch of grief,
More pangs will, schooled at forepangs, wilder wring.
Comforter, where, where is your comforting?
Mary, mother of us, where is your relief?
My cries heave, herds-long; huddle in a main, a chief
Woe, world-sorrow; on an age-old anvil wince and sing--
Then lull, then leave off. Fury had shrieked 'No ling-
ering! Let me be fell: force I must be brief'.

   O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall
Frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed. Hold them cheap
May who ne'er hung there. Nor does long our small
Durance deal with that steep or deep. Here! creep,
Wretch, under a comfort serves in a whirlwind: all
Life death does end and each day dies with sleep.


_42
Tom's Garland;

upon the Unemployed_

TOM--garlanded with squat and surly steel
Tom; then Tom's fallowbootfellow piles pick
By him and rips out rockfire homeforth--sturdy Dick;
Tom Heart-at-ease, Tom Navvy: he is all for his meal
Sure, 's bed now. Low be it: lustily he his low lot (feel
That ne'er need hunger, Tom; Tom seldom sick,
Seldomer heartsore; that treads through, prickproof,
     thick
Thousands of thorns, thoughts) swings though. Common-
     weal
Little I reck ho! lacklevel in, if all had bread:
What! Country is honour enough in all us--lordly head,
With heaven's lights high hung round, or, mother-ground
That mammocks, mighty foot. But no way sped,
Nor mind nor mainstrength; gold go garlanded
With, perilous, O nÛ; nor yet plod safe shod sound;
               Undenizened, beyond bound
Of earth's glory, earth's ease, all; no one, nowhere,
In wide the world's weal; rare gold, bold steel, bare
               In both; care, but share care--
This, by Despair, bred Hangdog dull; by Rage,
Manwolf, worse; and their packs infest the age.


_43
Harry Ploughman_

HARD as hurdle arms, with a broth of goldish flue
Breathed round; the rack of ribs; the scooped flank; lank
Rope-over thigh; knee-nave; and barrelled shank--
          Head and foot, shoulder and shank--
By a grey eye's heed steered well, one crew, fall to;
Stand at stress. Each limb's barrowy brawn, his thew
That onewhere curded, onewhere sucked or sank--
               Soared or sank--,
Though as a beechbole firm, finds his, as at a roll-
     call, rank
And features, in flesh, what deed he each must do--
          His sinew-service where do.

He leans to it, Harry bends, look. Back, elbow, and
     liquid waist
In him, all quail to the wallowing o' the plough:
     's cheek crimsons; curls
Wag or crossbridle, in a wind lifted, windlaced--
          See his wind- lilylocks -laced;
Churlsgrace, too, child of Amansstrength, how it hangs
     or hurls
Them--broad in bluff hide his frowning feet lashed! raced
With, along them, cragiron under and cold furls--
          With-a-fountain's shining-shot furls.


_44_

To seem the stranger lies my lot, my life
Among strangËrs. Father and mother dear,
Brothers and sisters are in Christ not near
And he my peace my parting, sword and strife.
   England, whose honour O all my heart woos, wife
To my creating thought, would neither hear
Me, were I pleading, plead nor do I: I wear-
y of idle a being but by where wars are rife.

   I am in Ireland now; now I am at a thÌrd
Remove. Not but in all removes I can
Kind love both give and get. Only what word
Wisest my heart breeds dark heaven's baffling ban
Bars or hell's spell thwarts. This to hoard unheard,
Heard unheeded, leaves me a lonely began.


_45_

I WAKE and feel the fell of dark, not day.
What hours, O what black ho¸rs we have spent
This night! what sights you, heart, saw; ways you went!
And more must, in yet longer light's delay.
     With witness I speak this. But where I say
Hours I mean years, mean life. And my lament
Is cries countless, cries like dead letters sent
To dearest him that lives alas! away.

I am gall, I am heartburn. God's most deep decree
Bitter would have me taste: my taste was me;
Bones built in me, flesh filled, blood brimmed the curse.
     Selfyeast of spirit a dull dough sours. I see
The lost are like this, and their scourge to be
As I am mine, their sweating selves; but worse.


_46_

PATIENCE, hard thing! the hard thing but to pray,
But bid for, Patience is! Patience who asks
Wants war, wants wounds; weary his times, his tasks;
To do without, take tosses, and obey.
   Rare patience roots in these, and, these away,
Nowhere. Natural heart's ivy, Patience masks
Our ruins of wrecked past purpose. There she basks
Purple eyes and seas of liquid leaves all day.

   We hear our hearts grate on themselves: it kills
To bruise them dearer. Yet the rebellious wills
Of us we do bid God bend to him even so.
   And where is he who more and more distils
Delicious kindness?--He is patient. Patience fills
His crisp combs, and that comes those ways we know.


_47_

MY own heart let me have more pity on; let
Me live to my sad self hereafter kind,
Charitable; not live this tormented mind
With this tormented mind tormenting yet.
   I cast for comfort I can no more get
By groping round my comfortless, than blind
Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find
Thirst's all-in-all in all a world of wet.

Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise
You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile
Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size
At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile
's not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather--as skies
Betweenpie mountains--lights a lovely mile.


_48
That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire and of
the comfort of the Resurrection_

CLOUD-PUFFBALL, torn tufts, tossed pillows | flaunt forth, then
     chevy on an air-
built thoroughfare: heaven-roysterers, in gay-gangs | they throng;
     they glitter in marches.
Down roughcast, down dazzling whitewash, | wherever an elm
   arches,
Shivelights and shadowtackle in long | lashes lace, lance, and pair.
Delightfully the bright wind boisterous | ropes, wrestles, beats
   earth bare
Of yestertempest's creases; in pool and rut peel parches
Squandering ooze to squeezed | dough, crust, dust; stanches,
   starches
Squadroned masks and manmarks | treadmire toil there
Footfretted in it. Million-fuelËd, | nature's bonfire burns on.
But quench her bonniest, dearest | to her, her clearest-selvËd spark
Man, how fast his firedint, | his mark on mind, is gone!
Both are in an unfathomable, all is in an enormous dark
Drowned. O pity and indig | nation! Manshape, that shone
Sheer off, disseveral, a star, | death blots black out; nor mark
          Is any of him at all so stark
But vastness blurs and time | beats level. Enough! the Resur-
     rection,
A heart's-clarion! Away grief's gasping, | joyless days, dejection.
          Across my foundering deck shone
A beacon, an eternal beam. | Flesh fade, and mortal trash
Fall to the residuary worm; | world's wildfire, leave but ash:
          In a flash, at a trumpet crash,
I am all at once what Christ is, | since he was what I am, and
This Jack, joke, poor potsherd, | patch, matchwood, immortal
     diamond,
          Is immortal diamond.


_49
In honour of
St. Alphonsus Rodriguez
Laybrother of the Society of Jesus_

HONOUR is flashed off exploit, so we say;
And those strokes once that gashed flesh or galled shield
Should tongue that time now, trumpet now that field,
And, on the fighter, forge his glorious day.
On Christ they do and on the martyr may;
But be the war within, the brand we wield
Unseen, the heroic breast not outward-steeled,
Earth hears no hurtle then from fiercest fray.

   Yet God (that hews mountain and continent,
Earth, all, out; who, with trickling increment,
Veins violets and tall trees makes more and more)
Could crowd career with conquest while there went
Those years and years by of world without event
That in Majorca Alfonso watched the door.


_50_

_Justus quidem tu es, Domine, si disputem tecum: verum-
tamen justa loquar ad te: Quare via impiorum prospera-
tur? &c._

THOU art indeed just, Lord, if I contend
With thee; but, sir, so what I plead is just.
Why do sinners' ways prosper? and why must
Disappointment all I endeavour end?

   Wert thou my enemy, O thou my friend,
How wouldst thou worse, I wonder, than thou dost
Defeat, thwart me? Oh, the sots and thralls of lust
Do in spare hours more thrive than I that spend,
Sir, life upon thy cause. See, banks and brakes
Now, leavËd how thick! lacËd they are again
With fretty chervil, look, and fresh wind shakes
Them; birds build--but not I build; no, but strain,
Time's eunuch, and not breed one work that wakes.
Mine, O thou lord of life, send my roots rain.


_51
To R. B._

THE fine delight that fathers thought; the strong
Spur, live and lancing like the blowpipe flame,
Breathes once and, quenchËd faster than it came,
Leaves yet the mind a mother of immortal song.
Nine months she then, nay years, nine years she long
Within her wears, bears, cares and moulds the same:
The widow of an insight lost she lives, with aim
Now known and hand at work now never wrong.
   Sweet fire the sire of muse, my soul needs this;
I want the one rapture of an inspiration.
O then if in my lagging lines you miss
The roll, the rise, the carol, the creation,
My winter world, that scarcely breathes that bliss
Now, yields you, with some sighs, our explanation.



UNFINISHED POEMS
& FRAGMENTS


_52
Summa_

THE best ideal is the true
   And other truth is none.
All glory be ascribËd to
   The holy Three in One.


_53_

WHAT being in rank-old nature should earlier have that
   breath been
That hÈre pÈrsonal tells off these heart-song powerful
peals?--
A bush-browed, beetle-brÛwed bÌllow is it?
With a so˙th-wÈsterly wÌnd bl˙stering, with a tide rolls
   reels
Of crumbling, fore-foundering, thundering all-surfy seas
   in; seen
⁄nderneath, their glassy barrel, of a fairy green.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
Or a jaunting vaunting vaulting assaulting trumpet telling


_54
On the Portrait of Two Beautiful
Young People

A Brother and Sister_

O I admire and sorrow! The heart's eye grieves
Discovering you, dark tramplers, tyrant years.
A juice rides rich through bluebells, in vine leaves,
And beauty's dearest veriest vein is tears.



Happy the father, mother of these! Too fast:
Not that, but thus far, all with frailty, blest
In one fair fall; but, for time's aftercast,
Creatures all heft, hope, hazard, interest.

And are they thus? The fine, the fingering beams
Their young delightful hour do feature down
That fleeted else like day-dissolvËd dreams
Or ringlet-race on burling Barrow brown.

She leans on him with such contentment fond
As well the sister sits, would well the wife;
His looks, the soul's own letters, see beyond,
Gaze on, and fall directly forth on life.

But ah, bright forelock, cluster that you are
Of favoured make and mind and health and youth,
Where lies your landmark, seamark, or soul's star?
There's none but truth can stead you. Christ is truth.

There's none but good can bÈ good, both for you
And what sways with you, maybe this sweet maid;
None good but God--a warning wavËd to
One once that was found wanting when Good weighed.

Man lives that list, that leaning in the will
No wisdom can forecast by gauge or guess,
The selfless self of self, most strange, most still,
Fast furled and all foredrawn to No or Yes.

Your feast of; that most in you earnest eye
May but call on your banes to more carouse.
Worst will the best. What worm was here, we cry,
To have havoc-pocked so, see, the hung-heavenward
     boughs?

Enough: corruption was the world's first woe.
What need I strain my heart beyond my ken?
O but I bear my burning witness though
Against the wild and wanton work of men.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_55_

THE sea took pity: it interposed with doom:
'I have tall daughters dear that heed my hand:
Let Winter wed one, sow them in her womb,
And she shall child them on the New-world strand.'
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_56
(Ash-boughs)_

a.

NOT of all my eyes see, wandering on the world,
Is anything a milk to the mind so, so sighs deep
Poetry to it, as a tree whose boughs break in the sky.
Say it is ashboughs: whether on a December day and
     furled
Fast Ûr they in clammyish lashtender combs creep
Apart wide and new-nestle at heaven most high.
They touch heaven, tabour on it; how their talons sweep
The smouldering enormous winter welkin! May
Mells blue and snowwhite through them, a fringe and fray
Of greenery: it is old earth's groping towards the steep
          Heaven whom she childs us by.

(Variant from line 7.) b.

They touch, they tabour on it, hover on it[; here, there
     hurled],
          With talons sweep
The smouldering enormous winter welkin. [Eye,
          But more cheer is when] May
Mells blue with snowwhite through their fringe and fray
Of greenery and old earth gropes for, grasps at steep
          Heaven with it whom she childs things by.


_57_

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
HOPE holds to Christ the mind's own mirror out
To take His lovely likeness more and more.
It will not well, so she would bring about
An ever brighter burnish than before
And turns to wash it from her welling eyes
And breathes the blots off all with sighs on sighs.
Her glass is blest but she as good as blind
Holds till hand aches and wonders what is there;
Her glass drinks light, she darkles down behind,
All of her glorious gainings unaware.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
I told you that she turned her mirror dim
Betweenwhiles, but she sees herself not Him.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_53
St. Winefred's Well

ACT I. Sc. I

_Enter Teryth from riding, Winefred following._

T. WHAT is it, Gwen, my girl? why do you hover and haunt me?

W. You came by Caerwys, sir?

T.           I came by Caerwys.

W.                There
   Some messenger there might have met you from my uncle.

T. Your uncle met the messenger--met me; and this the
     message:
   Lord Beuno comes to-night.

W.           To-night, sir!

T.                Soon, now: therefore
   Have all things ready in his room.

W.           There needs but little doing.

T. Let what there needs be done. Stay! with him one com-
     panion,
   His deacon, Dirvan Warm: twice over must the welcome be,
   But both will share one cell. This was good news,
     Gwenvrewi.

W. Ah yes!

T. Why, get thee gone then; tell thy mother I want her.
                         _Exit Winefred._
   No man has such a daughter. The fathers of the world
   Call no such maiden 'mine'. The deeper grows her
     dearness
   And more and more times laces round and round my heart,
   The more some monstrous hand gropes with clammy fingers
     there,
   Tampering with those sweet bines, draws them out, strains
     them, strains them;
   Meantime some tongue cries 'What, Teryth! what, thou
     poor fond father!
   How when this bloom, this honeysuckle, that rides the air
     so rich about thee,
   Is all, all sheared away, thus!' Then I sweat for fear.
   Or else a funeral, and yet 'tis not a funeral,
   Some pageant which takes tears and I must foot with
     feeling that
   Alive or dead my girl is carried in it, endlessly
   Goes marching thro' my mind. What sense is this? It
     has none.
   This is too much the father; nay the mother. Fanciful!
   I here forbid my thoughts to fool themselves with fears.

               _Enter Gwenlo._

     .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .


Act II.--_Scene, a wood ending in a steep bank over a dry dene,
     Winefred having been murdered within. Re-enter Caradoc
     with a bloody sword._

C. My heart, where have we been? What have we seen, my
     mind?
   What stroke has Caradoc's right arm dealt? what done?
     Head of a rebel
   Struck off it has; written upon lovely limbs,
   In bloody letters, lessons of earnest, of revenge;
   Monuments of my earnest, records of my revenge,
   On one that went against me whÈreas I had warned her--
   Warned her! well she knew. I warned her of this work.
   What work? what harm 's done? There is no harm done,
     none yet;
   Perhaps we struck no blow, Gwenvrewi lives perhaps;
   To makebelieve my mood was--mock. I might think so
   But here, here is a workman from his day's task sweats.
   Wiped I am sure this was; it seems not well; for still,
   Still the scarlet swings and dances on the blade.
   So be it. Thou steel, thou butcher,
   I c·n scour thee, fresh burnish thee, sheathe thee in thy
     dark lair; these drops
   Never, never, never in their blue banks again.
   The woeful, Cradock, the woeful word! Then what,
   What have we seen? Her head, sheared from her shoulders,
     fall,
   And lapped in shining hair, roll to the bank's edge; then
   Down the beetling banks, like water in waterfalls,
   It stooped and flashed and fell and ran like water away.
   Her eyes, oh and her eyes!
   In all her beauty, and sunlight to it is a pit, den, darkness,
   Foam-falling is not fresh to it, rainbow by it not beaming,
   In all her body, I say, no place was like her eyes,
   No piece matched those eyes kept most part much cast down
   But, being lifted, immortal, of immortal brightness.
   Several times I saw them, thrice or four times turning;
   Round and round they came and flashed towards heaven:
     O there,
   There they did appeal. Therefore airy vengeances
   Are afoot; heaven-vault fast purpling portends, and what
     first lightning
   Any instant falls means me. And I do not repent;
   I do not and I will not repent, not repent.
   The blame bear who aroused me. What I have done violent
   I have like a lion done, lionlike done,
   Honouring an uncontrolled royal wrathful nature,
   Mantling passion in a grandeur, crimson grandeur.
   Now be my pride then perfect, all one piece. Henceforth
   In a wide world of defiance Caradoc lives alone,
   Loyal to his own soul, laying his own law down, no law nor
   Lord now curb him for ever. O daring! O deep insight!
   What is virtue? Valour; only the heart valiant.
   And right? Only resolution; will, his will unwavering
   Who, like me, knowing his nature to the heart home,
     nature's business,
   Despatches with no flinching. But will flesh, O can flesh
   Second this fiery strain? Not always; O no no!
   We cannot live this life out; sometimes we must weary
   And in this darksome world what comfort can I find?
   Down this darksome world cÛmfort whÈre can I find
   When 'ts light I quenched; its rose, time's one rich rose,
     my hand,
   By her bloom, fast by her fresh, her fleecËd bloom,
   Hideous dashed down, leaving earth a winter withering
   With no now, no Gwenvrewi. I must miss her most
   That might have spared her were it but for passion-sake. Yes,
   To hunger and not have, yÈt hope Ûn for, to storm and
     strive and
   Be at every assault fresh foiled, worse flung, deeper dis-
     appointed,
   The turmoil and the torment, it has, I swear, a sweetness,
   Keeps a kind of joy in it, a zest, an edge, an ecstasy,
   Next after sweet success. I am not left even this;
   I all my being have hacked in half with her neck: one part,
   Reason, selfdisposal, choice of better or worse way,
   Is corpse now, cannot change; my other self, this soul,
   Life's quick, this kÌnd, this kÈen self-feeling,
   With dreadful distillation of thoughts sour as blood,
   Must all day long taste murder. What do nÛw then?
     Do? Nay,
   Deed-bound I am; one deed treads all down here cramps
        all doing. What do? Not yield,
   Not hope, not pray; despair; ay, that: brazen despair out,
   Brave all, and take what comes--as here this rabble is come,
   Whose bloods I reck no more of, no more rank with hers
   Than sewers with sacred oils. Mankind, that mobs, comes.
     Come!

_Enter a crowd, among them Teryth, Gwenlo, Beuno._

     .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

_After Winefred's raising from the dead and the breaking
               out of the fountain._

BEUNO. O now while skies are blue, now while seas are salt,
   While rushy rains shall fall or brooks shall fleet from
     fountains,
   While sick men shall cast sighs, of sweet health all despairing.
   While blind men's eyes shall thirst after daylight, draughts
     of daylight,
   Or deaf ears shall desire that lipmusic that's lost upon them,
   While cripples are, while lepers, dancers in dismal limb-
     dance,
   Fallers in dreadful frothpits, waterfearers wild,
   Stone, palsy, cancer, cough, lung wasting, womb not bearing,
   Rupture, running sores, what more? in brief, in burden,
   As long as men are mortal and God merciful,
   So long to this sweet spot, this leafy lean-over,
   This Dry Dene, now no longer dry nor dumb, but moist
     and musical
   With the uproll and the downcarol of day and night
     delivering
   Water, which keeps thy name, (for not in rÛck wrÌtten,
   But in pale water, frail water, wild rash and reeling water,
   That will not wear a print, that will not stain a pen,
   Thy venerable record, virgin, is recorded).
   Here to this holy well shall pilgrimages be,
   And not from purple Wales only nor from elmy England,
   But from beyond seas, Erin, France and Flanders, every-
     where,
   Pilgrims, still pilgrims, mÛre pÌlgrims, still more poor pilgrims.
   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
   What sights shall be when some that swung, wretches, on
     crutches
   Their crutches shall cast from them, on heels of air departing,
   Or they go rich as roseleaves hence that loathsome c·me
     hither!
   Not now to n·me even
   Those dearer, more divine boons whose haven the heart is.
   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
   As sure as what is most sure, sure as that spring primroses
   Shall new-dapple next year, sure as to-morrow morning,
   Amongst come-back-again things, thÌngs with a revival,
     things with a recovery,
   Thy name . . .

   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .


_59_

WHAT shall I do for the land that bred me,
Her homes and fields that folded and fed me?--
Be under her banner and live for her honour:
Under her banner I'll live for her honour.
   CHORUS. Under her banner live for her honour.

Not the pleasure, the pay, the plunder,
But country and flag, the flag I am under--
There is the shilling that finds me willing
To follow a banner and fight for honour.
   CH. We follow her banner, we fight for her honour.

Call me England's fame's fond lover,
Her fame to keep, her fame to recover.
Spend me or end me what God shall send me,
But under her banner I live for her honour.
   CH. Under her banner we march for her honour.

Where is the field I must play the man on?
O welcome there their steel or cannon.
Immortal beauty is death with duty,
If under her banner I fall for her honour.
   CH. Under her banner we fall for her honour.


_60_

THE times are nightfall, look, their light grows less;
The times are winter, watch, a world undone:
They waste, they wither worse; they as they run
Or bring more or more blazon man's distress.
And I not help. Nor word now of success:
All is from wreck, here, there, to rescue one--
Work which to see scarce so much as begun
Makes welcome death, does dear forgetfulness.

Or what is else? There is your world within.
There rid the dragons, root out there the sin.
Your will is law in that small commonweal . . .


_61
Cheery Beggar_

BEYOND M·gdalen and by the Bridge, on a place called
      there the Plain,
   In Summer, in a burst of summertime
   Following falls and falls of rain,
When the air was sweet-and-sour of the flown fineflower of
Those goldnails and their gaylinks that hang along a lime;
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

   The motion of that man's heart is fine
   Whom want could not make pÌne, pÌne
That struggling should not sear him, a gift should cheer
      him
Like that poor pocket of pence, poor pence of mine.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_62_

DENIS, whose motionable, alert, most vaulting wit
Caps occasion with an intellectual fit.
Yet Arthur is a Bowman: his three-heeled timber'll hit
The bald and bÛld blÌnking gold when ·ll's dÛne
Right rooting in the bare butt's wincing navel in the sight
     of the sun.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_63_

THE furl of fresh-leaved dogrose down
His cheeks the forth-and-flaunting sun
Had swarthed about with lion-brown
     Before the Spring was done.

His locks like all a ravel-rope's-end,
   With hempen strands in spray--
Fallow, foam-fallow, hanks--fall'n off their ranks,
   Swung down at a disarray.

Or like a juicy and jostling shock
   Of bluebells sheaved in May
Or wind-long fleeces on the flock
   A day off shearing day.

Then over his turnËd temples--here--
   Was a rose, or, failing that,
Rough-Robin or five-lipped campion clear
   For a beauty-bow to his hat,
And the sunlight sidled, like dewdrops, like dandled
     diamonds
Through the sieve of the straw of the plait.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .


_64

The Woodlark_

_TEEVO cheetio cheevio chee:_
O where, what can th·t be?
_Weedio-weedio:_ there again!
So tiny a trickle of sÛng-strain;
And all round not to be found
For brier, bough, furrow, or grÈen ground
Before or behind or far or at hand
Either left either right
Anywhere in the s˙nlight.
Well, after all! Ah but hark--
'I am the little woodlark.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
To-day the sky is two and two
With white strokes and strains of the blue
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
Round a ring, around a ring
And while I sail (must listen) I sing
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
The skylark is my cousin and he
Is known to men more than me
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
               . . . when the cry within
Says Go on then I go on
Till the longing is less and the good gone

But down drop, if it says Stop,
To the all-a-leaf of the trÈetop
And after that off the bough
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
I ·m so vÈry, O sÛ very glad
That I dÛ thÌnk there is not to be had . . .
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
The blue wheat-acre is underneath
And the braided ear breaks out of the sheath,
The ear in milk, lush the sash,
And crush-silk poppies aflash,
The blood-gush blade-gash
Flame-rash rudred
Bud shelling or broad-shed
Tatter-tassel-tangled and dingle-a-dangled
Dandy-hung dainty head.
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
And down ... the furrow dry
Sunspurge and oxeye
And laced-leaved lovely
Foam-tuft fumitory
     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
Through the velvety wind V-winged
To the nest's nook I balance and buoy
With a sweet joy of a sweet joy,
Sweet, of a sweet, of a sweet joy
Of a sweet--a sweet--sweet--joy.'


_65
Moonrise_

I AWOKE in the Midsummer not to call night, |in the
     white and the walk of the morning:
The moon, dwindled and thinned to the fringe | of a
     finger-nail held to the candle,
Or paring of paradisaÔcal fruit, | lovely in waning but
     lustreless,
Stepped from the stool, drew back from the barrow, | of
     dark Maenefa the mountain;
A cusp still clasped him, a fluke yet fanged him, | en-
     tangled him, not quit utterly.
This was the prized, the desirable sight, | unsought, pre-
     sented so easily,
Parted me leaf and leaf, divided me, | eyelid and eyelid of
     slumber.


_66_

REPEAT that, repeat,
Cuckoo, bird, and open ear wells, heart-springs, delight-
     fully sweet,
With a ballad, with a ballad, a rebound
Off trundled timber and scoops of the hillside ground,
     hollow hollow hollow ground:
The whole landscape flushes on a sudden at a sound.


_67
On a piece of music_

How all's to one thing wrought!

_See facsimile, after p. 92_.

(Transcriber's note: The facsimile of the handwritten poem
is omitted from this text version. It is freely available
online from the Internet Archive.)


_68_

'The child is father to the man.'
How can he be? The words are wild.
Suck any sense from that who can:
'The child is father to the man.'
No; what the poet did write ran,
'The man is father to the child.'
'The child is father to the man!'
How _can_ he be? The words are wild.


_69_

THE shepherd's brow fronting forked lightning, owns
The horror and the havoc and the glory
Of it. Angels fall, they are towers, from heaven--a story
Of just, majestical, and giant groans.
But man--we, scaffold of score brittle bones;
Who breathe, from groundlong babyhood to hoary
Age gasp; whose breath is our _memento mori_--
What bass is _our_ viol for tragic tones?
He! Hand to mouth he lives, and voids with shame;
And, blazoned in however bold the name,
Man Jack the man is, just; his mate a hussy.
And I that die these deaths, that feed this flame,
That ... in smooth spoons spy life's masque mirrored:
     tame
My tempests there, my fire and fever fussy.


_70
To his Watch_

MORTAL my mate, bearing my rock-a-heart
Warm beat with cold beat company, shall I
Earlier or you fail at our force, and lie
The ruins of, rifled, once a world of art?
The telling time our task is; time's some part,
Not all, but we were framed to fail and die--
One spell and well that one. There, ah thereby
Is comfort's carol of all or woe's worst smart.

Field-flown the departed day no morning brings
Saying 'This was yours' with her, but new one, worse.
And then that last and shortest . . .


_71_

STRIKE, churl; hurl, cheerless wind, then; heltering hail
May's beauty massacre and wispËd wild clouds grow
Out on the giant air; tell Summer No,
Bid joy back, have at the harvest, keep Hope pale.


_72
Epithalamion_

HARK, hearer, hear what I do; lend a thought now, make believe
We are leafwhelmed somewhere with the hood
Of some branchy bunchy bushybowered wood,
Southern dene or Lancashire clough or Devon cleave,
That leans along the loins of hills, where a candycoloured, where
     a gluegold-brown
Marbled river, boisterously beautiful, between
Roots and rocks is danced and dandled, all in froth and water-
     blowballs, down.
We are there, when we hear a shout
That the hanging honeysuck, the dogeared hazels in the cover
Makes dither, makes hover
And the riot of a rout
Of, it must be, boys from the town
Bathing: it is summer's sovereign good.

By there comes a listless stranger: beckoned by the noise
He drops towards the river: unseen
Sees the bevy of them, how the boys
With dare and with downdolphinry and bellbright bodies hud-
     dling out,
Are earthworld, airworld, waterworld thorough hurled, all by
     turn and turn about.

This garland of their gambols flashes in his breast
Into such a sudden zest
Of summertime joys
That he hies to a pool neighbouring; sees it is the best
There; sweetest, freshest, shadowiest;
Fairyland; silk-beech, scrolled ash, packed sycamore, wild
     wychelm, hornbeam fretty overstood
By. Rafts and rafts of flake-leaves light, dealt so, painted on the air,
Hang as still as hawk or hawkmoth, as the stars or as the angels
     there,
Like the thing that never knew the earth, never off roots
Rose. Here he feasts: lovely all is! No more: off with--
     down he dings
His bleachËd both and woolwoven wear:
Careless these in coloured wisp
All lie tumbled-to; then with loop-locks
Forward falling, forehead frowning, lips crisp
Over finger-teasing task, his twiny boots
Fast he opens, last he offwrings
Till walk the world he can with bare his feet
And come where lies a coffer, burly all of blocks
Built of chancequarriËd, selfquainËd rocks
And the water warbles over into, filleted with glassy grassy
     quicksilvery shivËs and shoots
And with heavenfallen freshness down from moorland still brims,
Dark or daylight on and on. Here he will then, here he will
     the fleet
Flinty kindcold element let break across his limbs
Long. Where we leave him, froliclavish while he looks about
     him, laughs, swims.

Enough now; since the sacred matter that I mean
I should be wronging longer leaving it to float
Upon this only gambolling and echoing-of-earth note--
What is ... the delightful dene?
Wedlock. What the water? Spousal love.

Father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends
Into fairy trees, wild flowers, wood ferns
RankËd round the bower







XXIV 



A Boy's 



INTO MY OWN 

One of my wishes is that those dark trees, 
So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze, 
Were not, as 'twere, the merest mask of gloom, 
But stretched away unto the edge of doom. 

I should not be withheld but that some day 
Into their vastness I should steal away, 
Fearless of ever finding open land, 
Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand. 

I do not see why I should e'er turn back, 
Or those should not set forth upon my track 
To overtake me, who should miss me hdre 
And long to know if still I held them dg&r. 

They would not find me changed from him they 

knew 
Only more sure of all I thought was true. 



GHOST HOUSE 

I dwell in a lonely house I know 

That vanished many a summer ago, 
And left no trace but the cellar walls, 
And a cellar in which the daylight falls, 

And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. 

O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield 
The woods come back to the mowing field; 
The orchard tree has grown one copse 
Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; 
The footpath down to the well is healed. 

I dwell with a strangely aching heart 

In that vanished abode there far apart 
On that disused and forgotten road 
That has no dust-bath now for the toad. 

Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; 

The whippoorwill is coming to shout 
And hush and cluck and flutter about: 

I hear him begin far enough away 

Full many a time to say his say 
Before he arrives to say it out. 



THE PASTURE 

I'm going out to clean the pasture spring; 
I'll only stop to rake the leaves away 
(And wait to watch the water clear, I may): 
I sha'n't be gone long. You come too. 

I'm going out to fetch the little calf 
That's standing by the mother. It's so young. 
It totters when she licks it with her tongue. 
I sha'n't be gone long. You come too. 



INTO MY OWN 

One of my wishes is that those dark trees, 
So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze, 
Were not, as 'twere, the merest mask of gloom, 
But stretched away unto the edge of doom. 

I should not be withheld but that some day 
Into their vastness I should steal away, 
Fearless of ever finding open land, 
Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand. 

I do not see why I should e'er turn back, 
Or those should not set forth upon my track 
To overtake me, who should miss me hdre 
And long to know if still I held them dg&r. 

They would not find me changed from him they 

knew 
Only more sure of all I thought was true. 



GHOST HOUSE 

I dwell in a lonely house I know 

That vanished many a summer ago, 
And left no trace but the cellar walls, 
And a cellar in which the daylight falls, 

And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. 

O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield 
The woods come back to the mowing field; 
The orchard tree has grown one copse 
Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; 
The footpath down to the well is healed. 

I dwell with a strangely aching heart 

In that vanished abode there far apart 
On that disused and forgotten road 
That has no dust-bath now for the toad. 

Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; 

The whippoorwill is coming to shout 
And hush and cluck and flutter about: 

I hear him begin far enough away 

Full many a time to say his say 
Before he arrives to say it out. 



It is under the small, dim, summer star. 

\ know not who these mute folk are 
Who share the unlit place with me 
Those stones out under the low-limbed tree 

Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. 

They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, 
Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad, 
With none among them that ever sings, 
And yet, in view of how many things, 
rVs sweet companions as might be had. 



MY NOVEMBER GUEST 

JVly Sorrow, when she's here with me, 
Thinks these dark days of autumn rain 

Are beautiful as days can be; 

She loves the bare, the withered tree; 
She walks the sodden pasture lane. 

Her pleasure will not let me stay. 

She talks and I am fain to list: 
She's glad the birds are gone away, 
She's glad her simple worsted grey 

Is silver now with clinging mist. 

The desolate, deserted trees, 

The faded earth, the heavy sky, 
The beauties she so truly sees, 
She thinks I have no eye for these, 
And vexes me for reason why. 

Not yesterday I learned to know 
The love of bare November days 

Before the coming of the snow, 

But it were vain to tell her so, 

And they are better for her praise. 



TO THE THAWING WIND 

C^ome with rain, O loud Southwester! 

Bring the singer, bring the nester; 

Give the buried flower a dream; 

Make the settled snow-bank stream; 

Find the brown beneath the white; 

But whate'er you do to-night, 

Bathe my window, make it flow > 

Melt it as the ice will go; 

Melt the glass and leave the sticks 

Like a hermit's crucifix; 

Burst into my narrow stall; 

Swing the picture on the wall; 

Run the rattling pages o'er; 

Scatter poems on the floor; 

Turn the poet out of door. 



12 



A PRAYER IN SPRING 

Oh, give us pleasure in the flowers to-day; 
And give us not to think so far away 
As the uncertain harvest; keep us here 
All simply in the springing of the year. 

Oh, give us pleasure in the orchard white, 
Like nothing else by day, like ghosts by night; 
And make us happy in the happy bees, 
The swarm dilating round the perfect trees. 

And make us happy in the darting bird 
That suddenly above the bees is heard, 
The meteor that thrusts in with needle bill, 
And off a blossom in mid air stands still. 

For this is love and nothing else is love, 
The which it is reserved for God above 
To sanctify to what far ends He will, 
But which it only needs that we fulfil. 



13 



LOVE AND A QUESTION 

A Stranger came to the door at eve, 

And he spoke the bridegroom fair. 
He bore a green- white stick in his hand, 

And, for all burden, care. 
He asked with the eyes more than the lips 

For a shelter for the night, 
And he turned and looked at the road afar 

Without a window light. 

The bridegroom came forth into the porch 

With 'Let us look at the sky, 
And question what of the night to be, 

Stranger, you and I.' 
The woodbine leaves littered the yard, 

The woodbine berries were blue, 
Autumn, yes, winter 'was in the wind; 

* Stranger, I wish I knew.' 

Within, the bride in the dusk alone 

Bent over the open fire, 
Her face rose-red with the glowing coal 

And the thought of the heart's desire. 
The bridegroom, looked at the weary road, 

Yet saw but her within, 
And wished her heart in a case of gold 

And pinned with a silver pin. 



The bridegroom thought it little to give 

A dole of bread, a purse, 
A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God, 

Or for the rich a curse; 
But whether or not a man was asked 

To mar the love of two 
By harboring woe in the bridal house, 

The bridegroom wished he knew. 



STARS 

How countlessly they congregate 
O'er our tumultuous snow. 

Which flows in shapes as tall as trees 
"When wintry winds do blow! - 

As if with keenness for our fate, 
Our faltering few steps on 

To white rest, and a place of rest 
Invisible at dawn, 

And yet with neither love nor hate, 
Those stars like some snow-white 

Minerva's snow-white marble eyes 
Without the gift of sight. 



1C 



STORM FEAR 

\Vhen the wind works against us in the dark, 
And pelts with snow 
The lower chamber window on the east, 
And whispers with a sort of stifled bark, 
The beast, 

'Come out! Come outf- 
it costs no inward struggle not to go, 
Ah, no! 

I count our strength, 
Two and a child, 

Those of us not asleep subdued to mark 
How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length,- 
How drifts are piled, 
Dooryard and road ungraded, 
Till even the comforting barn grows far away, 
And my heart owns a doubt 
Whether 'tis in us to arise with day 
And save ourselves unaided. 



11 



TO THE THAWING WIND 



with rain, O loud South wester! 
Bring the singer, bring the nester; 
Give the buried flower a dream; 
Make the settled snow-bank stream; 
Find the brown beneath the white; 
But whatever you do to-night, 
Bathe my window, make it flow > 
Melt it as the ice will go; 
Melt the glass and leave the sticks 
Like a hermit's crucifix; 
Burst into my narrow stall; 
Swing the picture on the wall; 
Run the rattling pages o'er; 
Scatter poems on the floor; 
Turn the poet out of door. 



12 



A PRAYER IN SPRING 

Oh, give us pleasure in the flowers to-day; 
And give us not to think so far away 
As the uncertain harvest; keep us here 
All simply in the springing of the year. 

Oh, give us pleasure in the orchard white, 
Like nothing else by day, like ghosts by night; 
And make us happy in the happy bees, 
The swarm dilating round the perfect trees. 

And make us happy in the darting bird 
That suddenly above the bees is heard, 
The meteor that thrusts in with needle bill, 
And off a blossom in mid air stands still. 

For this is love and nothing else is love, 
The which it is reserved for God above 
To sanctify to what far ends He will, 
But which it only needs that we fulfil. 



13 



FLOWER-GATHERING 

1 left you in the morning, 

And in the morning glow, 

You walked a way beside me 

To make me sad to go. 

Do you know me in the gloaming, 

Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming? 

Are you dumb because you know me not, 

Or dumb because you know? 

All for me? And not a question 

For the faded flowers gay 

That could take me from beside you 

For the ages of a day? 

They are yours, and be the measure 

Of their worth for you to treasure, 

The measure of the little while 

That I've been long away. 



ROSE POGONIAS 

A saturated meadow, 

Sun-shaped and jewel-small, 
A circle scarcely wider 

Than the trees around were tall; 
Where winds were quite excluded, 

And the air was stifling sweet 
With the breath of many flowers, 

A temple of the heat. 

There we bowed us in the burning, 

As the sun's right worship is, 
To pick where none could miss them 

A thousand orchises; 
For though the grass was scattered, 

Yet every second spear 
Seemed tipped with wings of color, 

That tinged the atmosphere. 

We raised a simple prayer 

Before we left the spot, 
That in the general mowing 

That place might be forgot; 
Or if not all so favoured, 

Obtain such grace of hours, 
That none should mow the grass there 

While so confused with flowers. 



15 



WAITING 
AFIELD AT DUSK 

What things for dream there are when spectre-like, 

Moving among tall haycocks lightly piled, 

I enter alone upon the stubble field, 

From which the laborers' voices late have died, 

And in the antiphony of afterglow 

And rising full moon, sit me down 

Upon the full moon's side of the first haycock 

And lose myself amid so many alike. 

I dream upon the opposing lights of the hour, 
Preventing shadow until the moon prevail; 
I dream upon the night-hawks peopling heaven, 
Each circling each with vague unearthly cry, 
Or plunging headlong with fierce twang afar; 
And on the bat's mute antics, who would seem 
Dimly to have made out my secret place, 
Only to lose it when he pirouettes, 
And seek it endlessly with purblind haste; 
On the last swallow's sweep; and on the rasp 
In the abyss of odor and rustle at my back, 
That, silenced by my advent, finds once more, 
After an interval, his instrument, 
And tries once twice and thrice if I be there; 
And on the worn book of old-golden song 
I brought not here to read, it seems, but hold 

16 



And freshen in this air of withering sweetness; 

But on the memory of one absent most, 

For whom these lines when they shall greet her eye. 



17 



IN NEGLECT 



1 hey leave us so to the -way we took, 

As two in whom they were proved mistaken. 
That we sit sometimes in the wayside nook, 
With mischievous > vagrant, seraphic look, 
And try if we cannot feel forsaken. 



18 



THE VANTAGE POINT 

If tired of trees I seek again mankind, 

Well I know where to hie me in the dawn, 
To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn. 

There amid lolling juniper reclined, 

Myself unseen, I see in white defined fc 

Far off the homes of men, and farther still, 
The graves of men on an opposing hill, 

Living or dead, whichever are to mind. 

And if by noon I have too much of these, 
I have but to turn on my arm, and lo, 
The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow, 

My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze, 
I smell the earth, I smell the bruised plant, 
I look into the crater of the ant. 



19 



MOWING 

1 here was never a sound beside the wood but one, 
And that was my long scythe whispering to the 

ground. 

What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself; 
Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun, 
Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound 
And that was why it whispered and did not speak. 
It was no dream of the gift of idle hours, 
Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf: 
Anything more than the truth would have seemed 

too weak 

To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows, 
Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers 
(Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake. 
The fact is the sweetest dream that labor knows. 
My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make. 



20 



GOING FOR WATER 

1 he well was dry beside the door, 
And so we went with pail and can 

Across the fields behind the house 
To seek the brook if still it ran; 

Not loth to have excuse to go, 
Because the autumn eve was fair 

(Though chill), because the fields were ours, 
And by the brook our woods were there. 

We ran as if to meet the moon 

That slowly dawned behind the trees, 

The barren boughs without the leaves, 
Without the birds, without the breeze. 

But once within the wood, we paused 
Like gnomes that hid us from the moon, 

Ready to run to hiding new 

With laughter when she found us soon. 

Each laid on other a staying hand 

To listen ere we dared to look, 
And in the hush we joined to make 

We heard, we knew we heard the brook. 



21 



A note as from a single place, 
A slender tinkling fall that made 

Now drops that floated on the pool 
Like pearls, and now a silver blade. 



22 



REVELATION 

\Ve make ourselves a place apart 

Behind light words that tease and flout, 

But oh, the agitated heart 

Till someone find us really out. 

'Tis pity if the case require 
(Or so we say) that in the end 

We speak the literal to inspire 
The understanding of a friend. 

But so with all, from babes that play 
At hide-and-seek to God afar, 

So all who hide too well away 

Must speak and tell us where they are. 



THE TUFT OF FLOWERS 

1 went to turn the grass once after one 
Who mowed it in the dew before the sun. 

The dew was gone that made his blade so keen 
Before I came to view the levelled scene. 

f looked for him behind an isle of trees; 
I listened for his whetstone on the breeze. 

But he had gone his way, the grass all mown, 
And I must be, as he had been, alone, 

'As all must be/ I said within my heart, 
'Whether they work together or apart/ 

But as I said it, swift there passed me by 
On noiseless wing a bewildered butterfly, 

Seeking with memories grown dim o'er night 
Some resting flower of yesterday's deKght. 

And once I marked his flight go round and round, 
As where some flower lay withering on the ground, 
i 

And then he flew as far as eye could see, 

And then on tremulous wing came back to me. 



I thought of questions that have no reply, 
And would have turned to toss the grass to dry; 

But he turned first, and led my eye to look 
At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook, 

A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared 
Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared. 

I left my place to know them by their name, 
Finding them butterfly weed when I came. 

The mower in the dew had loved them thus, 
By leaving them to flourish, not for us, 

Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him, 
But from sheer morning gladness at the brim. 

The butterfly and I had lit upon, 
Nevertheless, a message from the dawn, 

That made me hear the wakening birds around, 
And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground, 

And feel a spirit kindred to my own; 

So that henceforth I worked no more alone; 

But glad with him, I worked as with his aid, 
And weary, sought at noon with him the shade; 



And dreaming, as it were, held brotherly speech 
With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach. 

v Men work together/ I told him from the heart, 
'Whether they work together or apart.' 



.26 



THE DEMIURGE'S LAUGH 

It was far in the sameness of the wood; 

I was running with joy on the Demon's trail, 
Though I knew what I hunted was no true god. 

It was just as the light was beginning to fail 
That I suddenly heard all I needed to hear: 
It has lasted me many and many a year. 

The sound was behind me instead of before, 
A sleepy sound, but mocking half, 

As of one who utterly couldn't care. 

The Demon arose from his wallow to laugh, 

Brushing the dirt from his eye as he went; 

And well I knew what the Demon meant. 

I shall not forget how his laugh rang out. 

I felt as a fool to have been so caught, 
And checked my steps to make pretence 

It was something among the leaves I sought 
(Though doubtful whether he stayed to see). 
Thereafter I sat me against a tree. 



A LINE-STORM SONG 

The line-storm clouds fly tattered and swiftj 

The road is forlorn all day, 
\Vhere a myriad snowy quartz stones lift, 

And the hoof-prints vanish away. 
The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee, 

Expend their bloom in vain. 
Come over the hills and far with me, 

And be my love in the rain. 

The birds have less to say for themselves 

In the wood- world's torn despair 
Than now these numberless years the elves A 

Although they are no less there: 
All song of the woods is crushed like some 

Wild, easily shattered rose. 
Come, be my love in the wet woods, come, 

Where the boughs rain when it blows. 

There is the gale to urge behind 

And bruit our singing down, 
And the shallow waters aflutter with wind 

From which to gather your gown. 
What matter if we go clear to the west, 

And come not through dry-shod? 
For wilding brooch shall wet your breast 

The rain-fresh goldenrod. 



28 



Oh, never this whelming east wind swells 

But it seems like the sea's return 
To the ancient lands where it left the shells 

Before the age of the fern; 
And it seems like the time when after doubt 

Our love came back amain. 
Oh, come forth into the storm and rout 

And be my love in the rain. 



OCTOBER 

O hushed October morning mild, 
Thy leaves have ripened to the fall; 
To-morrow's wind, if it be wild, 
Should waste them all. 
The crows above the forest call; 
To-morrow they may form and go. 
O hushed October morning mild, 
Begin the hours of this day slow. 
Make the day seem to us less brief. 
Hearts not averse to being beguiled, 
Beguile us in the way you know. 
Release one leaf at break of day; 
At noon release another leaf; 
One from our trees, one far away. 
Retard the sun with gentle mist; 
Enchant the land with amethyst. 
Slow, slow! 

For the grapes' sake, if they were all, 
Whose leaves already are burnt with frost, 
Whose clustered fruit must else be lost 
For the grapes' sake along the wall. 



RELUCTANCE 

vJut through the fields and the woods 
And over the walls I have wended; 

I have climbed the hills of view 

And looked at the world., and descended; 

I have come by the highway home, 
And lo, it is ended. 

The leaves are all dead on the ground, 
Save those that the oak is keeping 

To ravel them one by one 

And let them go scraping and creeping 

Out over the crusted snow, 
\Vhen others are sleeping. 

And the dead leaves lie huddled and still, 
No longer blown hither and thither; 

The last lone aster is gone; 

The flowers of the witch-hazel wither; 

The heart is still aching to seek, 
But the feet question 'Whither?* 

Ah, when to the heart of man 
"Was it ever less than a treason 

To go with the drift of things, 
To yield with a grace to reason, 

And bow and accept the end 
Of a love or a season? 



North of Boston 



MENDING WALL 

Something there is that doesn't love a wall, 

That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it, 

And spills the upper boulders in the sun; 

And makes gaps even two can pass abreast. 

The work of hunters is another thing: 

I have come after them and made repair 

Where they have left not one stone on a stone, 

But they would have the rabbit out of hiding, 

To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean, 

No one has seen them made or heard them made 

But at spring mending-time we find them there. 

I let my neighbour know beyond the hill; 

And on a day we meet to walk the line 

And set the wall between us once again. 

We keep the wall between us as we go. 

To each the boulders *hat have fallen to each. 

And some are loaves and some so nearly balls 

We have to use a spell to make them balance: 

'Stay where you are until our backs are turned \ y 

We wear our fingers rough with handling them. 

Oh, just another kind of out-door game, 

One on a side. It comes to little more: 

There where it is we do not need the wall: 

He is all pine and I am apple orchard. 

My apple trees will never get across 

And eat the cones under his pines, I tell him. 

He only says, 'Good fences make good neighbours/ 

35 



Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder 

If I could put a notion in his head: 

'Why do they make good neighbours? Isn't it 

Where there are cows? But here there are no cows. 

Before I built a wall I'd ask to know 

What I was walling in or walling out, 

And to whom I was like to give offence. 

Something there is that doesn't love a wall, 

That wants it down/ I could say ( EIves' to him, 

But it's not elves exactly, and I'd rather 

He said it for himself. I see him there 

Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top 

In each hand, like an old-stone savage armed. 

He moves in darkness as it seems to me, 

Not of woods only and the shade of trees. 

He will not go behind his father's saying, 

And he likes having thought of it so well 

He says again, 'Good fences make good neighbours. 



THE MOUNTAIN 

1 he mountain held the town as in a shadow. 
I saw so much before I slept there once: 
I noticed that I missed stars in the west, 
Where its black body cut into the sky. 
Near me it seemed: I felt it like a wall 
Behind which I was sheltered from a wind. 
And yet between the town and it I found, 
When I walked forth at dawn to see new things, 
Were fields, a river, and beyond, more fields. 
The river at the time was fallen away, 
And made a widespread brawl 011 cobble-stones; 
But the signs showed what it had done in spring: 
Good grass-land gullied out, and in the grass 
Ridges of sand, and driftwood stripped of bark. 
I crossed the river and swung round the mountain. 
And there I met a man who moved so slow 
With white-faced oxen in a heavy cart, 
It seemed no harm to stop him altogether. 

'What town is this?' I asked. 

'This? Lunenburg.' 

Then I was wrong: the town of my sojourn, 
Beyond the bridge, was not that of the mountain, 
But only felt at night its shadowy presence. 
* Where is your village? Very far from here?* 

45 



There is no village only scattered farms. 
We were but sixty voters last election. 
We can't in nature grow to many more: 
That thing takes all the room!' He moved his goad. 
The mountain stood there to be pointed at. 
asture ran up the side a little way, 
\nd then there was a wall of trees with trunks; 
After that only tops of trees, and cliffs 
Imperfectly concealed among the leaves. 
A dry ravine emerged from under boughs 
Into the pasture. 

'That looks like a path. 
Is that the way to reach the top from here? 
Not for this morning, but some other time: 
I must be getting back to breakfast now/ 

'I don't advise your trying from this side. 
There is no proper path, but those that have 
Been up, I understand, have climbed from Ladd's. 
That's five miles back. You can't mistake the place: 
They logged it there last winter some way up. 
Td take you, but Fm bound the other way.' 

You've never climbed it?' 

I've been on the sides, 

Deer-hunting and trout-fishing. There's a brook 
That starts up on it somewhere I've heard say 
Right on the top, tip-top a curious thing. 

46 



But what would interest you about the brook, 

It's always cold in summer, warm in winter. 

One of the great sights going is to see 

It steam in winter like an ox's breath, 

Until the bushes all along its banks 

Are inch-deep with the frosty spines and bristles 

You know the kind. Then let the sun shine on it!' 

'There ought to be a view around the world 
From such a mountain if it isn't wooded 
Clear to the top.' I saw through leafy screens 
Great granite terraces in sun and shadow, 
Shelves one could rest a knee on getting up 
With depths behind him sheer a hundred feet. 
Or turn and sit on and look out and down, 
With little ferns in crevices at his elbow. 

* As to that I can't say. But there's the spring, 
Right on the summit, almost like a fountain. 
That ought to be worth seeing/ 

If it's there. 
You never saw it? 1 

'I guess there's no doubt 
About its being there. I never saw it. 
It may not be right on the very top: 
It wouldn't have to be a long way down 
To have some head of water from above, 
And a good distance down might not be noticed 

47 



By anyone who'd come a long way up. 
One time I asked a fellow climbing it 
To look and tell me later how it was.' 

' What did he say?' 

'He said there was a lake 
Somewhere in Ireland on a mountain top.' 

'But a lake's different. What about the spring?' 

'He never got up high enough to see. 
That's why I don't advise your trying this side. 
He tried this side. I've always meant to go 
And look myself, but you know how it is: 
It doesn't seem so much to climb a mountain 
You've worked around the foot of all your life. 
What would I do? Go in my overalls, 
With a big stick, the same as when the cows 
Haven't come down to the bars at milking lime? 
Or with a shotgun for a stray black bear? 
'Twouldn't seem real to climb for climbing it ' 

f l shouldn't climb it if I didn't want to 

Not for the sake of climbing. What's its name^' 

'We call it Hor: I don't know if that's right/ 
Can one walk around it? Would it be too far?' 



( You can drive round and keep in Lunenburg, 
But it's as much as ever you can do, 
The boundary lines keep in so close to it. 
Hor is the township, and the township's Hor 
And a few houses sprinkled round the foot, 
Like boulders broken off the upper cliff, 
Rolled out a little farther than the rest/ 

' Warm in December, cold in June, you say?' 

'I don't suppose the water's changed at all. 
You and I know enough to know it's warm 
Compared with cold, and cold compared with warm 
But all the fun's in how you say a thing.' 

1 You've lived here all your life?' 

'Ever since Hor 

Was no bigger than a' What, I did not hear. 
He drew the oxen toward him with light touches 
Of his slim goad on nose and offside flank, 
Gave them their marching orders and was moving, 



A HUNDRED COLLARS 

Lancaster bore him such a little town, 

Such a great man. It doesn't see him often 

Of late years, though he keeps the old homestead 

And sends the children down there with their mother 

To run wild in the summer a little wild. 

Sometimes he joins them for a day or two 

And sees old friends he somehow can't get near. 

They meet him in the general store at night, 

Pre-occupied with formidable mail, 

Rifling a printed letter as he talks. 

They seem afraid. He wouldn't have it so: 

Though a great scholar, he's a democrat, 

If not at heart, at least on principle. 

Lately when coming up to Lancaster, 

His train being late, he missed another train 

And had four hours to wait at Woodsville Junction 

After eleven o'clock at night. Too tired 

To think of sitting such an ordeal out, 

He turned to the hotel to find a bed. 

'No room/ the night clerk said. 'Unless' 

Woodsville's a place of shrieks and wandering lamps 
And cars that shock and rattle and one hotel. 

'You say "unless."' 
50 



'Unless you wouldn't mind 
Sharing a room with someone else.' 

'Who is it?' 



man. 



'So I should hope. What kind of man?' 

'I know him: he's all right. A man's a man. 
Separate beds, of course, you understand.' 
The night clerk blinked his eyes and dared him on. 

Who's that man sleeping in the office chair? 
Has he had the refusal of my chance?' 

'He was afraid of being robbed or murdered. 
What do you say?' 

Til have to have a bed.' 

The night clerk led him up three flights of stairs 
And down a narrow passage full of doors, 
At the last one of which he knocked and entered. 
'Lafe, here's a fellow wants to share your room.' 

'Show him this way. I'm not afraid of him. 
I'm not so drunk I can't take care of myself.' 



The night clerk clapped a bedstead on the foot. 
'This will be yours. Good-night,' he said, and went 

'Lafe was the name, I think?' 

'Yes, Layfayette. 
You got it the first time. And yours?' 

'Magoon,. 
Doctor Magoon.' 

'A Doctor?' 

'Well, a teacher/'' 

'Professor Square-the-circle-till-you're-tired? 
Hold on, there's something I don't think of now 
That I had on my mind to ask the first 
Man that knew anything I happened in with. 
I'll ask you later don't let me forget it.' 

The Doctor looked at Lafe and looked away. 

A man? A brute. Naked above the waist, 

He sat there creased and shining in the light, 

Fumbling the buttons in a well-starched shirt: 

'I'm moving into a size-larger shirt. 

I've felt mean lately; mean's no name for it. 

I just found what the matter was to-night: 

I've been a-choking like a nursery tree 

When it outgrows the wire band of its name tag. 

52 



I blamed it on the hot spell we've been having. 
'Twas nothing but my foolish hanging back, 
Not liking to own up I'd grown a size. 
Number eighteen this is. What size do you wear?' 

The Doctor caught his throat convulsively. 
v Oh ah fourteen fourteen. ' 

'Fourteen! You say so! 
I can remember when I wore fourteen. 
And come to think I must have back at home 
More than a hundred collars, size fourteen. 
Too bad to waste them all. You ought to have 

them. 
They're yours and welcome; let me send them to 

you. 

What makes you stand there on one leg like that? 
You're not much furtherer than where Kike left you. 
You act as if you wished you hadn't come. 
Sit down or lie down, friend; you make me nervous/ 

The Doctor made a subdued dash for it, 
And propped himself at bay against a pillow. 

'Not that way, with your shoes on Kike's white bed 
You can't rest that way. Let me pull your shoes off.' 

'Don't touch me, please I say, don't touch me, 

please. 
I'll not be put to bed by you, my man.' 

53 



'Just as you say. Have it your own way then. 
"My man" is it? You talk like a professor. 
Speaking of who's afraid of who, however, 
I'm thinking I have more to lose than you 
If anything should happen to be wrong. 
Who wants to cut your number fourteen throat I 
Let's have a show down as an evidence 
Of good faith. There is ninety dollars. 
Come, if you're not afraid/ 

f Tm not afraid. 
There's five: that's all I carry.' 

1 can search you? 

Where are you moving over to? Stay still. 
You'd better tuck your money under you 
And sleep on it the way I always do 
When I'm with people I don't trust at night.' 

'Will you believe me if I put it there 

Right on the counterpanethat I do trust you?' 

'You'd say so, Mister Man. I'm a collector. 
My ninety isn't mine you won't think that. 
I pick it up a dollar at a time 
All round the country for the Weekly News, 
Published in Bow. You know the Weekly News?' 

'Known it since I was young.' 
54 



'Then you know me. 
Now we are getting on together talking. 
I'm sort of Something for it at the front. 
My business is to find what people want: 
They pay for it, and so they ought to have it. 
Fairbanks, he says to mehe's editor 
"Feel out the public sentiment" he says. 
A good deal comes on me when all is said. 
The only trouble is we disagree 
In politics: I'm Vermont Democrat 
You know what that is, sort of double-dyed; 
The News has always been Republican. 
Fairbanks, he says to me, "Help us this year," 
Meaning by us their ticket. "No," I says, 
"I can't and won't. You've been in long enough: 
It's time you turned around and boosted us. 
You'll have to pay me more than ten a week 
If Fm expected to elect Bill Taft. 
I doubt if I could do it anyway." ' 

1 You seem to shape the paper's policy/ 

* You see I'm in with everybody, know 'em all. 
I almost know their farms as well as they do/ 

' You drive around? It must be pleasant work/ 

It's business, but I can't say it's not fun. 
What I like best's the lay of different farms, 

55 



Coming out on them from a stretch of woods, 

Or over a hill or round a sudden corner. 

I like to find folks getting out in spring, 

Raking the dooryard, working near the house. 

Later they get out further in the fields. 

Everything's shut sometimes except the barn; 

The family's all away in some back meadow. 

There's a hay load a-coming when it comes. 

And later still they all get driven in: 

The fields are stripped to lawn, the garden patches 

Stripped to bare ground, the maple trees 

To whips and poles. There's nobody about. 

The chimney, though, keeps up a good brisk smoking. 

And I lie back and ride. I take the reins 

Only when someone's coming, and the mare 

Stops when she likes: I tell her when to go. 

I've spoiled Jemima in more ways than one. 

She's got so she turns in at every house 

As if she had some sort of curvature, 

No matter if I have no errand there. 

She thinks I'm sociable. I maybe am. 

It's seldom I get down except for meals, though. 

Folks entertain me from the kitchen doorstep, 

All in a family row down to the youngest.' 

'One would suppose they might not be as glad 
To see you as you are to see them/ 

'Oh, 
Because I want their dollar? I don't want 

56 



Anything they've not got. I never dun. 
I'm there, and they can pay me if they like. 
I go nowhere on purpose: I happen by. 
Sorry there is no cup to give you a drink. 
I drink out of the bottle not your style. 
Mayn't I offer you?' 

'No, no, no, thank you/ 

'Just as you say. Here's looking at you then. 
And now I'm leaving you a little while. 
You'll rest easier when I'm gone, perhaps 
Lie down let yourself go and get some sleep. 
Bnt first let's see what was I going to ask you? 
Those collars who shall I address them to, 
Suppose you aren't awake when I come back?' 

* Really, friend, I can't let you. You may need them.* 
'Not till I shrink, when they'll be out of style.' 
'But really I I have so many collars.' 

'I don't know who I rather would have have them. 
They're only turning yellow where they are. 
But you're the doctor as the saying is. 
I'll put the light out. Don't you wait for me: 
I've just begun the night. You get some sleep. 
I'll knock so-fashion and peep round the door 
When I come back so you'll know who it is. 

57 



There's nothing I'm afraid of like scared people. 
I don't want you should shoot me in the head. 
What am I doing carrying off this bottle? 
There now, you get some sleep/ 

He shut the door. 
The Doctor slid a little down the pillow. 



Against the lounge beside it, though I doubt 

If such unlifelike lines kept power to stir 

Anything in her after all the years. 

He fell at Gettysburg or Fredericksburg, 

I ought to know it makes a difference which: 

Fredericksburg wasn't Gettysburg, of course. 

But what I'm getting to is how forsaken 

A little cottage this has always seemed; 

Since she went more than ever, but before 

I don't mean altogether by the lives 

That had gone out of it, the father first, 

Then the two sons, till she was left alone. 

(Nothing could draw her after those two sons. 

She valued the considerate neglect 

She had at some costtaught them after years.) 

I meanby the woilZ^'sJhiayjngpasscd it by"" 

As we^almost got by this afternoon^ 

It always seems to me a sort of mark 

To measure how far fifty years have brought us. 

Why not sit down if you are in no haste? 

These doorsteps seldom have a visitor. 

The warping boards pull out their own old nails 

With none to tread and put them in their place. 

She had her own idea of things, the old lady. 

And she liked talk. She had seen Garrison 

And Whittier, and had her story of them. 

One wasn't long in learning that she thought 

Whatever else the Civil War was for, 

It wasn't just to keep the States together, 

Nor just to free the slaves, though it did both. 

65 



She wouldn't have believed those ends enough 
To have given outright for them all she gave. 
Her giving somehow touched the principle 
That all men are created free and equal. 
And to hear her quaint phrasesso removed 
From the world's view to-day of all those things. 
That's a hard mystery of Jefferson's. 
What did he mean? Of course the easy way 
Is to decide it simply isn't true. 
It may not be. I heard a fellow say so. 
But never mind, the Welshman got it planted 
Where it will trouble us a thousand years. 
Each age will have to reconsider it. 
You couldn't tell her what the West was saying, 
And what the South to her serene belief. 
She had some art of hearing and yet not 
Hearing the latter wisdom of the world. 
White was the only race she ever knew. 
Black she had scarcely seen, and yellow never. 
But how could they be made so very unlike 
By the same hand working in the same stuff? 
She had supposed the war decided that. 
What are you going to do with such a person? 
Strange how such innocence gets its own way. 
I shouldn't be surprised if in this world 
It were the force that would at last prevail. 
Do you know but for her there was a time 
When to please younger members of the church, 
Or rather say non-members in the church, 
Whom we all have to think of nowadays, 

66 



I would have changed the Creed a very little? 

Not that she ever had to ask me not to; 

It never got so far as that; but the bare thought 

Of her old tremulous bonnet in the pew, 

And of her half asleep was too much for me. 

Why, I might wake her up and startle her. 

It was the words "descended into Hades' ' 

That seemed too pagan to our liberal youth. 

You know they suffered from a general onslaught. 

And well, if they weren't true why keep right on 

Saying them like the heathen? We could drop them. 

Only there was the bonnet in the pew. 

Such a phrase couldn't have meant much to her. 

But suppose she had missed it from the Creed 

As a child misses the unsaid Good-night, 

And falls asleep with heartache how should I feel? 

Fm just as glad she made me keep hands off, 

For, dear me, why abandon a belief 

Merely because it ceases to be true. 

Cling to it long enough, and not a doubt 

It will turn true again, for so it goes. 

Most of the change we think we see in life 

Is due to truths being in and out of favour. 

As I sit here, and oftentimes, I wish 

I could be monarch of a desert land 

I could devote and dedicate forever 

To the truths we keep coming back and back to. 

So desert it would have to be, so walled 

By mountain ranges half in summer snow, 

No one would covet it or think it worth 

67 



The pains of conquering to force change on. 
Scattered oases where men dwelt, but mostly 
Sand dunes held loosely in tamarisk 
Blown over and over themselves in idleness. 
Sand grains should sugar in the natal dew 
The babe born to the desert, the sand storm 
Retard mid-waste my cowering caravans- 
There are bees in this wall. 7 He struck the clapboards, 
Fierce heads looked out; small bodies pivoted. 
We rose to go. Sunset blazed on the windows. 



68 



BLUEBERRIES 1 

You ought to have seen what I saw on my way 
To the village, through Patterson's pasture to-day: 
Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb, 
Real sky-blue, and heavy, and ready to drum 
In the cavernous pail of the first one to come! 
And all ripe together, not some of them green 
And some of them ripe! You ought to have seenP 

'I don't know what part of the pasture you mean.' 

< You know where they cut off the woods let me see~ 

It was two years ago or no! can it be 

No longer than that? and the following fall 

The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall.' 

'Why, there hasn't been time for the bushes to grow % 
That's always the way with the blueberries, though: 
There may not have been the ghost of a sign 
Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine, 
But get the pine out of the way, you may burn 
The pasture all over until not a fern 
Or grass-blade is left, not to mention a stick, 
And presto, they're up all around you as thick 
And hard to explain as a conjuror's trick/ 

'It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit. 
I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot. 



And after all really they're ebony skinned: 

The blue's but a mist from the breath of the wind, 

A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand, 

And less than the tan with which pickers are tanned/ 

'Does Patterson know what he has, do you think?' 

'He may and not care and so leave the chewink 
To gather them for him you know what he is. 
He won't make the fact that they're rightfully his 
An excuse for keeping us other folk out/ 

'I wonder you didn't see Loren about.' 

'The best of it was that I did. Do you know, 

[ was just getting through what the field had to show 

And over the wall and into the road, 

When who should come by, with a democrat-load 

Of all the young chattering Lorens alive, 

But Loren, the fatherly, out for a drive/ 

'He saw you, then? What did he do? Did he frown?' 

'He just kept nodding his head up and down. 
You know how politely he always goes by. 
But he thought a big thought I could tell by his eye 
Which being expressed, might be this in effect: 
!< I have left those there berries, I shrewdly suspect, 
To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame." ' 

70 



'He's a thriftier person than some I could name/ 

'He seems to be thrifty; and hasn't he need, 

With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed? 

He has brought them all up on wild berries, they say, 

Like birds. They store a great many away. 

They eat them the year round, and those they don't eat 

They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet/ 

'Who cares what they say? It's a nice way to live, 
Just taking what Nature is willing to give, 
Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow.' 

'I wish you had seen his perpetual bow 

And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them turned, 

And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned/ 

'I wish I knew half what the flock of them know 
Of where all the berries and other things grow, 
Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top 
Of the boulder-strewn mountain, and when they 

will crop. 

I met them one day and each had a flower 
Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower; 
Some strange kindthey told me it hadn't a name/ 

Tve told you how once not long after we came, 
I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth 
By going to him of all people on earth 

71 



To ask if he knew any fruit to be had 
For the picking. The rascal, he said he'd be glad 
To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad. 
There had been some berries but those were all gone. 
He didn't say where they had been. He went on: 
"I'm sure I'm sure" as polite as could be. 
He spoke to his wife in the door, "Let me see, 
Mame, we don't know any good berrying place?" 
It was all he could do to keep a straight face.' 

'If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him, 
He'll find he's mistaken. See here, for a whim, 
We'll pick in the Pattersons' pasture this year. 
We'll go in the morning, that is, if it's clear, 
And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be wet. 
It's so long since I picked I almost forget 
How we used to pick berries: we took one look round. 
Then sank out of sight like trolls underground, 
And saw nothing more of each other, or heard, 
Unless when you said I was keeping a bird 
Away from its nest, and I said it was you. 
"Well, one of us is." For complaining it flew 
Around and around us. And then for a while 
We picked, till I feared you had wandered a mile, 
And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout 
Too loud for the distance you were, it turned out, 
For when you made answer, your voice was as low 
fas talking you stood up beside me, you know/ 

( We ska'n't have the place to ourselves to enjoy 
72 



Not likely, when all the young Lorens deploy. 
They'll be there lo-morrow, or even to-night. 
They won't be too friendly they may be polite 
To people they look on as having no right 
To pick where they're picking. But we won't com- 
plain. 

You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain, 
The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves, 
Like two kinds of jewels, a vision for thieves.' 



73 



A SERVANT TO SERVANTS 

I didn't make you know how glad I was 

To have you come and camp here on our land. 

I promised myself to get down some day 

And see the way you lived, but I don't know! 

With a houseful of hungry men to feed 

I guess you'd find. ... It seems to me 

I can't express my feelings any more 

Than I can raise my voice or want to lift 

My hand (oh, I can lift it when I have to). 

Did ever you feel so? I hope you never. 

It's got so I don't even know for sure 

Whether I am glad, sorry, or anything. 

There's nothing but a voice-like left inside 

That seems to tell me how I ought to feel, 

And would feel if I wasn't all gone wrong. 

You take the lake. I look and look at it. 

I see it's a fair, pretty sheet of water. 

I stand and make myself repeat out loud 

The advantages it has, so long and narrow, 

Like a deep piece of some old running river 

Cut short off at both ends. It lies five miles 

Straight away through the mountain notch 

From the sink window where I wash the plates, 

And all our storms come up toward the house, 

Drawing the slow waves whiter and whiter and 

whiter. 
It took my mind off doughnuts and soda biscuit 

74 



To step outdoors and take the water dazzle 
A sunny morning, or take the rising wind 
About my face and body and through my wrapper, 
When a storm threatened from the Dragon's Den, 
And a cold chill shivered across the lake. 
I see it's a fair, pretty sheet of water, 
Our Willoughby! How did you hear of it? 
I expect, though, everyone's heard of it. 
In a book about ferns? Listen to that! 
You let things more like feathers regulate 
Your going and coming. And you like it here? 
I can see how you might. But I don't know! 
It would be different if more people came, 
For then there would be business. As it is, 
The cottages Len built, sometimes we rent them, 
Sometimes we don't. We've a good piece of shore 
That ought to be worth something, and may yet. 
But I don't count on it as much as Len. 
He looks on the bright side of everything, 
Including me. He thinks I'll be all right 
With doctoring. But it's not medicine- 
Lowe is the only doctor's dared to say so- 
ft's rest I want there, I have said it out 
From cooking meals for hungry hired men 
And washing dishes after them from doing 
Things over and over that just won't stay done. 
By good rights I ought not to have so much 
Put on me, but there seems no other way. 
Len says one steady pull more ought to do it. 
He says the best way out is always through. 

75 



And I agree to that, or in so far 
As that I can see no way out but through 
Leastways for me and then they'll be convinced. 
It's not that Len don't want the best for me. 
It was his plan our moving over in 
Beside the lake from where that day I showed you 
We used to live ten miles from anywhere. 
We didn't change without some sacrifice, 
But Len went at it to make up the loss. 
His work's a man's, of course, from sun to sun, 
But he works when he works as hard as I do- 
Though there's small profit in comparisons. 
(Women and men will make them all the same. ) 
But work ain't all. Len undertakes too much. 
He's into everything in town. This year 
It's highways, and he's got too many men 
Around him to look after that make waste. 
They take advantage of him shamefully, 
And proud, too, of themselves for doing so. 
We have four here to board, great good-for-nothings, 
Sprawling about the kitchen with their talk 
While I fry their bacon. Much they care! 
No more put out in what they do or say 
Than if I wasn't in the room at all. 
Coming and going all the time, they are: 
I don't learn what their names are, let alone 
Their characters, or whether they are safe 
To have inside the house with doors unlocked. 
Fm not afraid of them, though, if they're not 
Afraid of me. There's two can play at that. 



I have my fancies: it runs in the family. 
My father's brother wasn't right. They kept him 
Locked up for years back there at the old farm. 
I've been away once yes, IVe been away. 
The State Asylum. I was prejudiced; 
I wouldn't have sent anyone of mine there; 
You know the old ideathe only asylum 
Was the poorhouse, and those who could afford, 
Rather than send their folks to such a place, 
Kept them at home; and it does seem more human. 
But it's not so: the place is the asylum. 
There they have every means proper to do with, 
And you aren't darkening other people's lives- 
Worse than no good to them, and they no good 
To you in your condition; you can't know 
Affection or the want of it in that state. 
I've heard too much of the old-fashioned way. 
My father's brother, he went mad quite young. 
Some thought he had been bitten by a dog, 
Because his violence took on the form 
Of carrying his pillow in his teeth; 
But it's more likely he was crossed in love, 
Or so the story goes. It was some girl. 
Anyway all he talked about was love. 
They soon saw he would do someone a mischief 
If he wa'n't kept strict watch of, and it ended 
In father's building him a sort of cage, 
Or room within a room, of hickory poles, 
Like stanchions in the barn, from floor to ceiling. 
A narrow passage all the way around. 



Anything they put in for furniture 

He'd tear to pieces, even a bed to lie on. 

So they made the place comfortable with straw, 

Like a beast's stall, to ease their consciences. 

Of course they had to feed him without dishes. 

They tried to keep him clothed, but he paraded 

With his clothes on his arm all of his clothes. 

Cruelit sounds. I 'spose they did the best 

They knew. And just when he was at the height, 

Father and mother married, and mother came, 

A bride, to help take care of such a creature, 

And accommodate her young life to his. 

That was what marrying father meant to her. 

She had to lie and hear love things made dreadful 

By his shouts in the night. He'd shout and shout 

Until the strength was shouted out of him, 

And his voice died down slowly from exhaustion. 

He'd pull his bars apart like bow and bowstring, 

And let them go and make them twang until 

His hands had worn them smooth as any oxbow. 

And then he'd crow as if he thought that child's play 

The only fun he had. I've heard them say, though, 

They found a way to put a stop to it. 

He was before my time I never saw him; 

But the pen stayed exactly as it was 

There in the upper chamber in the ell, 

A sort of catch-all full of attic clutter. 

I often think of tJig^nioathJiickof.y, bars. 

It got so I would say you know, half fooling 

'It's time I took my turn upstairs in jail' 

Just as you will till it becomes a habit. 

78 



No wonder L was glad to get away. 
Mind you, I waited till Len said the word. 
I didn't want the blame if things went wrong. 
I was glad though ; no end, when we moved out, 
And I looked to be happy, and I was, 
As I said, for a while but I don't know! 
Somehow the change wore out like a prescription. 
And there's more to it than just window-views 
And living by a lake. I'm past such help 
Unless Len took the notion, which he won't, 
And I won't ask himit's not sure enough. 
I 'spose I've got to go the road Fm going: 
Other folks have to, and why shouldn't I? 
T almost think if I could do like you, 
Drop everything and live out on the ground- 
But it might be, come night, I shouldn't like it, 
Or a long rain. I should soon get enough, 
And be glad of a good roof overhead. 
Fve lain awake thinking of you, Fll warrant, 
More than you have yourself, some of these nights. 
The wonder was the tents weren't snatched away 
From over you as you lay in your beds. 
I haven't courage for a risk like that. 
Bless you, of course, you're keeping me from work, 
But the thing of it is, I need to be kept. 
There's work enough to do there's always that; 
But behind' s behind. The worst that you can do 
Is set me back a little more behind. 
I sha'n't catch up in this world, anyway. 
I'd rather you'd not go unless you must. 



AFTER APPLE-PICKING 

IVly long two-pointed ladder 's sticking through a 

tree 

Toward heaven still, 
And there's a barrel that I didn't fill 
Beside it, and there may be two or three 
Apples I didn't pick upon some bough. 
But I am done with apple-picking now. 
Essence of winter sleep is on the night, 
The scent of apples: I am drowsing off. 
I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight 
I got from looking through a pane of glass 
I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough 
And held against the world of hoary grass. 
It melted, and I let it fall and break. 
But I was well 

Upon my way to sleep before it fell, 
And I could tell 

What form my dreaming was about to take. 
Magnified apples appear and disappear, 
Stem end and blossom end, 
And every fleck of russet showing clear. 
My instep arch not only keeps the ache, 
It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round. 
I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend. 
And I keep hearing from the cellar bin 
The rumbling sound 
Of load on load of apples coming in. 

80 



For I have had too much 

Of apple-picking: I am overtired 

Of the great harvest I myself desired. 

There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch, 

Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall. 

For all 

That struck the earth, 

No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble, 

Went surely to the cider-apple heap 

As of no worth. 

One can see what will trouble 

This sleep of mine, whatever sleep itj. 

Were he not gone, 

The woodchuck could say whether it's like his 

Long sleep, as I describe its coming on, 

Or just some human sleep. 



81 



THE CODE 

1 here were three in the meadow by the brook 
Gathering up windrows, piling cocks of hay, 
With an eye always lifted toward the west 
Where an irregular sun-bordered cloud 
Darkly advanced with a perpetual dagger 
Flickering across its bosom. Suddenly 
One helper, thrusting pitchfork in the ground, 
Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed. 
The town-bred farmer failed to understand. 

* What is there wrong?' 

'Something you just now said/ 
' What did I say?' 

* About our taking pains/ 

'To cock the hay? because it's going to shower? 
I said that more than half an hour ago. 
I said it to myself as much as you/ 

'You didn't know. But James is one big fool. 
He thought you meant to find fault with his work. 
That's what the average farmer would have meant. 
James would take time, of course, to chew it over 
Before he acted: he's just got round to act/ 

82 



'He is a fool if that's the way he takes me.' 

'Don't let it bother you. You've found out something 
The hand that knows his business won't be told 
To do work better 01 fasterthose two things. 
I'm as particular as anyone: 
Most likely I'd have served you just the same. 
But I know you don't understand our ways. 
You were just talking what was in your mind, 
What was in all our minds, and you weren't hinting. 
Tell you a story of what happened once: 
I was up here in Salem at a man's 
Named Sanders with a gang of four or five 
Doing the haying. No one liked the boss. 
He was one of the kind sports call a spider, 
All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavy 
From a humped body nigh as big's a biscuit 
But work! that man could work, especially 
If by so doing he could get more work 
Out of his hired help. I'm not denying 
He was hard on himself. I couldn't find 
That he kept any hours not for himself. 
Daylight and lantern-light were one to him: 
I've heard him pounding in the barn all night. 
But what he liked was someone to encourage. 
Them that he couldn't lead he'd get behind 
And drive, the way you can, you know, in mowing- 
Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs off 
I'd seen about enough of his bulling tricks 
(We call that bulling). I'd been watching him. 

83 



So when he paired off with me in the hayfield 

To load the load, thinks I, Look out for trouble. 

I built the load and topped it off; old Sanders 

Combed it down with a rake and says, "O. K." 

Everything went well till we reached the barn 

With a big jag to empty in a bay. 

You understand that meant the easy job 

For the man up on top of throwing down 

The hay and rolling it off wholesale, 

Where on a mow it would have been slow lifting. 

You wouldn't think a fellow'd need much urging 

Under those circumstances, would you now? 

But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands, 

And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit, 

Shouts like an army captain, "Let her come!" 

Thinks I, D'ye mean it? " What was that you said?" 

I asked out loud, so's there'd be no mistake, 

"Did you say, Let her come?" "Yes, let her come." 

He said it over, but he said it softer. 

Never you say a thing like that to a man, 

Not if he values what he is. God, I'd as soon 

Murdered him as left out his middle name. 

Fd built the load and knew right where to find it. 

Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round for 

Like meditating, and then I just dug in 

And dumped the rackful on him in ten lots. 

I looked over the side once in the dust 

And caught sight of him treading- water-like, 

Keeping his head above. "Damn ye," I says, 

84 



"That gets ye!" He squeaked like a squeezed rat. 

That was the last I saw or heard of him. 

I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off. 

As I sat mopping hayseed from my neck, 

And sort of waiting to be asked about it, 

One of the boys sings out, " Where's the old man?" 

"I left him in the barn under the hay. 

If ye want him, ye can go and dig him out." 

They realized from the way I swobbed my neck 

More than was needed something must be up. 

They headed for the barn; I stayed where I was. 

They told me afterward. First they forked hay, 

A lot of it, out into the barn floor. 

Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle. 

I guess they thought I'd spiked him in the temple 

Before I buried him, or I couldn't have managed. 

They excavated more. "Go keep his wife 

Out of the barn." Someone looked in a window, 

And curse me if he wasn't in the kitchen 

Slumped way down in a chair, with both his feet 

Against the stove, the hottest day that summer. 

He looked so clean disgusted from behind 

There was no one that dared to stir him up, 

Or let him know that he was being looked at. 

Apparently I hadn't buried him 

(I may have knocked him down); but my just trying 

To bury him had hurt his dignity. 

He had gone to the house so's not to meet me. 

He kept away from us all afternoon. 

85 



We tended to his hay. We saw him out 

After a while picking peas in his garden: 

He couldn't keep away from doing something.' 

* Weren't you relieved to find he wasn't dead?' 

No! and yet I d'jn't know it's hard to say, 
I went about to kill him fair enough.' 

' You took an awkward way. Did he discharge you? 1 
4 Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right/ 



86 



THE GENERATIONS OF MEN 

A. governor it was proclaimed this time, 
When all who would come seeking in 

Hampshire 
Ancestral memories might come together. 
And those of the name Stark gathered in Bow, 
A rock-strewn town where farming has fallefrofl, 
And sprout-lands flourish where the axe has gone. 
Someone had literally run to earth 
In an old cellar hole in a by-road 
The origin of all the family there. 
Thence they were sprung, so numerous a tribe 
That now not all the houses left in town 
Made shift to shelter them without the help 
Of here and there a tent in grove and orchard. 
They were at Bow, but that was not enough: 
Nothing would do butthey must fix a day 
To stand together on the crater's verge 
That turned them on the world, and try to fathom 
The past and get some strangeness out of it. 
But rain spoiled all. The day began uncertain, 
With clouds low trailing and moments of rain that 

misted. 

The young folk held some hope out to each other 
Till well toward noon when the storm settled down 
With a swish in the grass. 'What if the others 
Are there/ they said. 'It isn't going to rain/ 
Only one from a farm not far away 

87 



Strolled thither, not expecting he would find 

Anyone else, but out of idleness. 

One, and one other, yes, for there were two. 

The second round the curving hillside road 

Was a girl; and she halted some way off 

To reconnoitre, and then made up her mind 

At least to pass by and see who he was, 

And perhaps hear some word about the weather. 

This was some Stark she didn't know. He nodded. 

'No fete to-day/ he said. 

'It looks that way/ 

She swept the heavens, turning on her heel. 
'I only idled down/ 

'I idled down/ 

Provision there had been for just such meeting 
Of stranger cousins, in a family tree 
Drawn on a sort of passport with the branch 
Of the one bearing it done in detail- 
Some zealous one's laborious device. 
She made a sudden movement toward her bodice, 
As one who clasps her heart. They laughed together. 
'Stark?' he inquired. 'No matter for the proof/ 

'Yes, Stark. And you?' 

Tm Stark.' He drew his passport. 
68 



( You know we might not be and still be cousins: 

The town is full of Chases, Lowes, and Baileys, 

All claiming some priority in Starkness. 

My mother was a Lane, yet might have married 

Anyone upon earth and still her children 

Would have been Starks, and doubtless here to-day.' 

( You riddle with your genealogy 
Like a Viola. I don't follow you/ 

*I only mean my mother was a Stark 
Several times over, and by marrying father 
No more than brought us back into the name/ 

'One ought not to be thrown into confusion 

By a plain statement of relationship, 

But I own what you say makes my head spin. 

You take my card you seem so good at such things 

And see if you can reckon our cousinship. 

Why not take seats here on the cellar wall 

And dangle feet among the raspberry vines?* 

'Under the shelter of the family tree/ 
'Just so that ought to be enough protection/ 
'Not from the rain. I think it's going to rain/ 
'It's raining/ 

89 



'No, it's misting; let's be fair. 
Does the rain seem to you to cool the eyes?' 

The situation was like this: the road 

Bowed outward on the mountain half-way up, 

And disappeared and ended not far off. 

No one went home that way. The only house 

Beyond where they were was a shattered secdpod. 

And below roared a brook hidden in trees, 

The sound of which was silence for the place. 

This he sat listening to till she gave judgment. 

'On father's side, it seems, we're let me see' 
'Don't be too technical. You have three cards.' 

Tour cards, one yours, three mine, one for each 
branch 
Of the Stark family I'm a member of.' 

'D'you know a person so related to herself 
Is supposed to be mad.' 

*I may be mad/ 

< You look so, sitting out here in the rain 
Studying genealogy with me 
You never saw before. What will we come to 
With all this pride of ancestry, we Yankees? 
I think we're all mad. Tell me why we're here 

90 



Drawn into town about this cellar hole 
Like wild geese on a lake before a storm? 
What do we see in such a hole, I wonder/ 

'The Indians had a myth of Chicamoztoc, 

Which means The Seven Caves that We Came out ot. 

This is the pit from which we Starks were digged/ 

'You must be learned. That's what you see in it?' 
'And what do you see?' 

' Yes, what do I see? 
First let me look. I see raspberry vines' 

'Oh, if you're going to use your eyes, just hear 

What / see. It's a little, little boy, 

As pale and dim as a match flame in the sun; 

He's groping in the cellar after jam, 

He thinks it's dark and it's flooded with daylight/ 

'He's nothing. Listen. When I lean like this 
I can make out old Grandsir Stark distinctly, 
With his pipe in his mouth and his brown jug- 
Bless you, it isn't Grandsir Stark, it's Granny, 
But the pipe's there and smoking and the jug. 
She's after cider, the old girl, she's thirsty; 
Here's hoping she gets her drink and gets out safely/ 

'Tell me about her. Does she look like me? 1 

91 



'She should, shouldn't she, you're so many times 
Over descended from her. I believe 
She does look like you. Stay the way you are. 
The nose is just the same, and so's the chin- 
Making allowance, making due allowance.' 

'You poor, dear, great, great, great, great Granny!' 
'See that you get her greatness right. Don't stint her/ 

' Yes, it's important, though you think it isn't. 
I won't be teased. But see how wet I am.' 

1 Yes, you must go; we can't stay here for ever. 

But wait until I give you a hand up. 

A bead of silver water more or less 

Strung on your hair won't hurt your summer looks 

I wanted to try something with the noise 

That the brook raises in the empty valley. 

We have seen visions now consult the voices. 

Something I must have learned riding in trains 

When I was young. I used to use the roar 

To set the voices speaking out of it, 

Speaking or singing, and the band-music playing 

Perhaps you have the art of what I mean. 

I've never listened in among the sounds 

That a brook makes in such a wild descent. 

It ought to give a purer oracle.' 



'It's as you throw a picture on a screen: 

The meaning of it all is out of you; 

The voices give you what you wish to hear.' 

'Strangely, it's anything they wish to give/ 

'Then I don't know. It must be strange enough. 

I wonder if it's not your make-believe. 

What do you think you're like to hear to-day?' 

'From the sense of our having been together 
But why take time for what I'm like to hear? 
I'll tell you what the voices really say. 
You will do very well right where you are 
A little longer. I mustn't feel too hurried, 
Or I can't give myself to hear the voices.' 

'Is this some trance you are withdrawing into?' 
'You must be very still; you mustn't talk/ 
Til hardly breathe/ 

'The voices seem to say' 
Tin waiting/ 

'Don't! The voices seem to say: 
Call her Nausicaa, the unafraid 
Of an acquaintance made adventurously/ 

93 



'I let you say thaton consideration.' 

'I don't see very well how you can help it. 
You want the truth. I speak but by the voices. 
You sec they know I haven't had your name, 
Though what a name should matter between us 

'I shall suspect-' 

'Be good. The voices say: 
Call her Nausicaa, and take a timber 
That you shall find lies in the cellar charred 
Among the raspberries, and hew and shape it 
For a door-sill or other corner piece 
In a new cottage on the ancient spot. 
The life is not yet all gone out of it. 
And come and make your summer dwelling here, 
And perhaps she will come., still unafraid, 
And sit before you in the open door 
With flowers in her lap until they fade, 
But not come in across the sacred sill' 

'I wonder where your oracle is tending. 
You can see that there's something wrong with it, 
Or it would speak in dialect. Whose voice 
Does it purport to speak in? Not old Grandsir's 
Nor Granny's, surely. Call up one of them. 
They have best right to be heard in this place/ 



94 



'You seem so partial to our great-grandmother 
(Nine times removed. Correct me if I err.) 
You will be likely to regard as sacred 
Anything she may say. But let me warn you, 
Folks in her day were given to plain speaking. 
You think you'd best tempt her at such a time?' 

c lt rests with us always to cut her off/ 

1 Well then, it's Granny speaking: "I dunnow! 

Mebbe I'm wrong to take it as I do. 

There ain't no names quite like the old ones 

though, 

Nor never will be to my way of thinking. 
One mustn't bear too hard on the new comers, 
But there's a dite too many of them for comfort. 
I should feel easier if I could see 
More of the salt wherewith they're to be salted. 
Son, you do as you're told! You take the timber- 
It's as sound as the day when it was cut 
And begin over" There, she'd better stop. 
You can see what is troubling Granny, though. 
But don't you think we sometimes make too much 
Of the old stock? What counts is the ideals, 
And those will bear some keeping still about.' 

'I can see we are going to be good friends.' 



'I like your "going to be." You said just now 
It's going to rain/ 



95 



'I know, and it was raining. 
I let you say all that. But I must go now.' 

* You let me say it? on consideration? 
How shall we say good-bye in such a case?' 

'How shall we?' 

* Will you leave the way to me?' 

'No, I don't trust your eyes. You've said enough. 
Now give me your hand up. Pick me that flower.' 

' Where shall we meet again?' 

' No where but here 
Once more before we meet elsewhere.' 

'In rain?' 

'It ought to be in rain. Sometime in rain. 
In rain to-morrow, shall we, if it rains? 
But if we must, in sunshine.' So she went. 



THE HOUSEKEEPER 



1 let myself in at the kitchen door. 

It's you/ she said. 'I can't get up. Forgive mt 
Not answering your knock. I can no more 
Let people in than I can keep them out. 
I'm getting too old for my size, I tell them. 
My fingers are about all I've the use of 
So's to take any comfort. I can sew: 
I help out with this beadwork what I can/ 

'That's a smart pair of pumps you're beading there. 
Who are they for?' 

' You mean? oh, for some miss. 
I can't keep track of other people's daughters. 
Lord, if I were to dream of everyone 
Whose shoes I primped to dance in!' 

'And where's John? 1 

'Haven't you seen him? Strange what set you off 
To come to his house when he's gone to yours. 
You can't have passed each other. I know what: 
He must have changed his mind and gone to Gar* 

land's. 

He won't be long in that case. You can wait. 
Though what good you can be, or anyone-- 
It's gone so far. You've heard? Estelle's run off.' 

97 



'Yes, what's it all about? When did she go? 7 
'Two weeks since/ 

'She's in earnest, it appears/ 

Tm sure she won't come back. She's hiding some- 
where. 

I don't know where myself. John thinks I do. 
He thinks I only have to say the word, 
And she'll come back. But, bless you, I'm her mother 
I can't talk to her, and, Lord, if I could!' 

'It will go hard with John. What will he do? 
He can't find anyone to take her place.' 

'Oh, if you ask me that, what will he do? 

He gets some sort of bakeshop meals together, 

With me to sit and tell him everything, 

What's wanted and how much and where it is. 

But when I'm gone of course I can't stay here: 

EstenVs to take me when she's settled down. 

He and I only hinder one another. 

I tell them they can't get me through the door, 

though: 

I've been built in here like a big church organ. 
We've been here fifteen years.' 

'That's a long time 
To live together and then pull apart. 

98 



How do you see him living when you're gone? 
Two of you out will leave an empty house/ 

1 don't just see him living many years, 

Left here with nothing but the furniture. 

I hate to think of the old place when we're gonfc, 

With the brook going by below the yard, 

And no one here but hens blowing about. 

If he could sell the place, but then, he can't: 

No one will ever live on it again. 

It's too run down. This is the last of it. 

What I think he will do, is let things smash. 

He'll sort of swear the time away. He's awful! 

I never saw a man let family troubles 

Make so much difference in his man's affairs. 

He's just dropped everything. He's like a child. 

I blame his being brought up by his mother. 

He's got hay down that's been rained on three times. 

He hoed a little yesterday for me: 

I thought the growing things would do him good. 

Something went wrong. I saw him throw the hoe 

Sky-high with both hands. I can see it now 

Come here I'll show you in that apple tree. 

That's no way for a man to do at his age: 

He's fifty-five, you know, if he's a day.' 

'Aren't you afraid of him? What's that gun for?' 

'Oh, that's been there for hawks since chicken-time. 
John Hall touch me! Not if he knows his friends. 

99 



I'll say that for him ; John's no threatener 
Like some men folk. No one's afraid of him; 
All is, he's made up his mind not to stand 
What he has got to stand.' 

' Where is Estelle? 

Couldn't one talk to her? What does she say? 
You say you don't know where she is.' 

v Nor wanttol 

She thinks if it was bad to live with him, 
It must be right to leave him.' 

1 Which is wrong!' 
'Yes, but he should have married her.' 

'I know.' 

J The strain's been too much for her fjl these years: 

[ can't explain it any other way. 

It's different with a man, at least with John: 

He knows he's kinder than the run of men. 

Better than married ought to be as good 

As married that's what he has always said. 

t know the way he's felt but all the same!' 

1 wonder why he doesn't marry her 
And end it.' 



10O 



'Too late now: she wouldn't have him. 
He's given her time to think of something else. 
That's his mistake. The dear knows my interest 
Has been to keep the thing from breaking up. 
This is a good home: I don't ask for better. 
But whenl' ve said, ' ' Why shouldn't they be married/*' 
He'd say, " Why should they?" no more words that 
that.' 

'And after all why should they? John's been fair 
I take it. What was his was always hers. 
There was no quarrel about property.' 

'Reason enough, there was no property. 
A friend or two as good as own the farm, 
Such as it is. It isn't worth the mortgage/ 

'I mean Estelle has always held the purse/ 

'The rights of that are harder to get at. 
I guess Estelle and I have filled the purse. 
'Twas we let him have money, not he us. 
John's a bad farmer. I'm not blaming him. 
Take it year in, year out, he doesn't make much. 
We came here for a home for me, you know, 
Estelle to do the housework for the board 
Of both of us. But look how it turns out: 
She seems to have the housework, and besides 
Half of the outdoor work, though as for that, 
He'd say she does it more because she likes it. 

101 



You see our pretty things are all outdoors. 

Our hens and cows and pigs are always better 

Than folks like us have any business with. 

Farmers around twice as well off as we 

Haven't as good. They don't go with the farm. 

One thing you can't help liking about John, 

He's fond of nice things too fond, some would say. 

But Estelle don't complain: she's like him there. 

She wants our hens to be the best there are. 

You never saw this room before a show, 

Full of lank, shivery, half-drowned birds 

In separate coops, having their plumage done. 

The smell of the wet feathers in the heat! 

You spoke of John's not being safe to stay with. 

You don't know what a gentle lot we are: 

We wouldn't hurt a hen! You ought to see us 

Moving a flock of hens from place to place. 

We're not allowed to take them upside down, 

All we can hold together by the legs. 

Two at a time's the rule, one on each arm, 

No matter how far and how many times 

We have to go/ 

' You mean that's John's idea/ 

'And we live up to it; or I don't know 
What childishness he wouldn't give way to. 
He manages to keep the upper hand 
On his own farm. He's boss. But as to hens: 
We fence our flowers in and the hens range. 

102 



Nothing's too good for them. We say it pays. 
John likes to tell the offers he has had, 
Twenty for this cock, twenty-five for that. 
He never takes the money. If they're worth 
That much to sell, they ' re worth as much to keep. 
Bless you, it's all expense, though. Reach me down 
The little tin box on the cupboard shelf, 
The upper shelf, the tin box. That's the one. 
Til show you. Here you are/ 

'What's this?' 

'Abill- 

For fifty dollars for one Langshang cock 
Receipted. And the cock is in the yard/ 

'Not in a glass case, then?' 

'He'd need a tall one: 
He can eat off a barrel from the ground. 
He's been in a glass case, as you may say, 
The Crystal Palace, London. He's imported. 
John bought him, and we paid the bill with beads-* 
Wampum, I call it. Mind, we don't complain. 
But you see, don't you, we take care of him.' 

'And like it, too. It makes it all the worse/ 

'It seems as if. And that's not all: he's helpless 
In ways that I can hardly tell you of. 

103 



Sometimes he gets possessed to keep accounts 
To see where all the money goes so fast. 
You know how men will be ridiculous. 
But it's just fun the way he gets bedeviled 
If he's untidy now, what will he be?' 

J It makes it all the worse. You must be blind/ 
'Estelle's the one. You needn't talk to me/ 

J Can't you and I get to the root of it? 

What's the real trouble? What will satisfy her?' 

"It's as I say; she's turned from him, that's ali/ 

'But why, when she's well off? Is it the neighbours, 
Being cut off from friends?' 

< We have our friends. 
That isn't it. Folks aren't afraid of us/ 

'She's let it worry her. You stood the strain, 
And you're her mother/ 

'But I didn't always. 
I didn't relish it along at first. 
But I got wonted to it. And besides 
John said I was too old to have grandchildren. 
But what's the use of talking when it's done? 
She won't come back it's worse than that she can't. 1 

104 



< Why do you speak like that? What do you know? 
What do you mean? she's done harm to herself?' 

'I mean she's marriedmarried someone else/ 
'Oho, oho!' 

'You don't believe me/ 

'Yes, I do, 

Only too well. I knew there must be something! 
So that was what was back. She's bad, that's all!' 

'Bad to get married when she had the chance?' 
'Nonsense! See what she's done! But who, but who 

'Who'd marry her straight out of such a mess? 
Say it right out no matter for her mother. 
The man was found. I'd better name no names. 
John himself won't imagine who he is/ 

'Then it's all up. I think I'll get away. 
You'll be expecting John. I pity Estelle; 
I suppose she deserves some pity, too. 
You ought to have the kitchen to yourself 
To break it to him. You may have the job/ 

'You needn't think you're going to get away, 
John's almost here. I've had my eye on someone 

105 



Coming down Ryan's Hill. I thought 'twas him. 
Here he is now. This box! Put it away. 
And this bill/ 

What's the hurry? He'll unhitch/ 

'No, he won't, either. He'll just drop the reins 
And turn Doll out to pasture, rig and all. 
She won't get far before the wheels hang up 
On something there's no harm. See, there he is! 
My, but he looks as if he must have heard!' 

John threw the door wide but he didn't enter. 
'How are you, neighbour? Just the man I'm after. 
Isn't it Hell,' he said. 'I want to know. 
Come out here if you want to hear me talk. 
Til talk to you, old woman, afterward. 
I've got some news that maybe isn't news. 
What are they trying to do to me, these two? 7 

'Do go along with him and stop his shouting/ 
She raised her voice against the closing door: 
"Who wants to hear your news, youdreadful fool?' 



106 



THE FEAR 

A lantern light from deeper in the barn 
Shone on a man and woman in the door 
And threw their lurching shadows on a house 
Near by, all dark in every glossy window. 
A horse's hoof pawed once the hollow floor, 
And the back of the gig they stood beside 
Moved in a little. The man grasped a wheel, 
The woman spoke out sharply, 'Whoa, stand still! 
I saw it just as plain as a white plate/ 
She said, 'as the light on the dashboard ran 
Along the bushes at the roadside a man's face. 
You must have seen it too/ 

1 didn't see it. 
Are you sure' 

' Yes, I'm sure!' 

'it was a face?' 

*}oel, Til have to look. I can't go in, 
I can't, and leave a thing like that unsettled. 
Doors locked and curtains drawn will make no dif- 
ference. 

I always have felt strange when we came home 
To the dark house after so long an absence, 
And the key rattled loudly into place 

107 



Seemed to warn someone to be getting out 
At one door as we entered at another. 
What if Fm right, and someone all the time- 
Don' t hold my arm!' 

1 say it's someone passing/ 

'You speak as if this were a travelled road. 
You forget where we are. What is beyond 
That he'd be going to or coming from 
At such an hour of night, and on foot too? 
What was he standing still for in the bushes?' 

It's not so very late -it's only dark. 

There's more in it than you're inclined to say. 

Did he look like-?' 

'He looked like anyone. 
I'll never rest to-night unless I know. 
Give me the lantern.' 

'You don't want the lantern. 
She pushed past him and got it for herself. 

'You're not to come/ she said. 'This is my business 
If the time's come to face it, Fm the one 
To put it the right way. He'd never dare 
Listen! He kicked a stone. Hear that, hear that! 
He's coming towards us. Joel, go in please. 
Hark! 1 don't hear him now. But please go in/ 

108 



'In the first place you can't make me believe 

it's-' 

'It is or someone else he's sent to watch. 
And now's the time to have it out with him 
While we know definitely where he is. 
Let him get off and he'll be everywhere 
Around us, looking out of trees and bushes 
Till I sha'n't dare to set a foot outdoors. 
And I can't stand it. Joel, let me go!' 

'But it's nonsense to think he'd care enough.' 

( You mean you couldn't understand his caring. 
Oh, but you see he hadn't had enough- 
Joel; I won't I won' t I promise you. 
We mustn't say hard things. You mustn't either.' 

Til be the one, if anybody goes! 

But you give him the advantage with this light. 

What couldn't he do to us standing here! 

And if to see was what he wanted, why 

He has seen all there was to see and gone/ 

He appeared to forget to* keep his hold, 

But advanced with her as she crossed the grass. 

4 What do you want?' she cried to all the dark. 
She stretched up tall to overlook the light 
That hung in both hands hot against her skirt. 



'There's no one; so you're wrong/ he said. 

'There ib. 

What do you want?' she cried, and then herself 
Was startled when an answer really came. 

'Nothing/ It came from well along the road. 

She reached a hand to Joel for support: 

The smell of scorching woollen made her faint. 

"What are you doing round this house at night?' 
'Nothing.' A pause: there seemed no more to say. 

And then the voice again: You seem afraid. 
I saw by the way you whipped up the horse. 
I'll just come forward in the lantern light 
And let you see.' 

'Yes, do. Joel, go back!' 

She stood her ground against the noisy steps 
That came on, but her body rocked a little. 

'You see/ the voice said. 

'Oh.' She looked and looked. 



110 



1 You don't secI've a child here by the hand. 
A robber wouldn't have his family with him/ 

* What's a child doing at this time of night?' 

'Out walking. Every child should have the memory 
Of at least one long-after-bedtime walk. 
What, son?' 

'Then I should think you'd try to find 
Somewhere to walk' 

'The highway, as it happens- 
We're stopping for the fortnight down at Dean's.' 

'But if that's all Joelyou realize 

You won't think anything. You understand? 

You understand that we have to be careful. 

This is a very, very lonely place. 

Joel!' She spoke as if she couldn't turn. 

The swinging lantern lengthened to the ground, 

It touched, it struck, it clattered and went out. 



Ill 



THE WOOD-PILE 

Out walking in the frozen swamp one grey day, 

I paused and said, 'I will turn back from here. 

No, I will go on farther and we shall see/ 

The hard snow held me, save where now and then 

One foot went through. The view was all in lines 

Straight up and down of tall slim trees 

Too much alike to mark or name a place by 

So as to say for certain I was here 

Or somewhere else: I was just far from home. 

A small bird flew before me. He was careful 

To put a tree between us when tye lighted, 

And say no word to tell me who he was 

Who was so foolish as to think what he thought. 

He thought that I was after him for a feather 

The white one in his tail; like one who takes 

Everything said as personal to himself. 

One flight out sideways would have undeceived him. 

And then there was a pile of wood for which 

I forgot him and let his little fear 

Carry him off the way I might have gone, 

Without so much as wishing him good-night. 

He went behind it to make his last stand. 

It was a cord of maple, cut and split 

And piled and measured, four by four by eight. 

And not another like it could I see. 

No runner tracks in this year's snow looped near it. 

And it was older sure than this year's cutting, 

112 



Or even last year's or the year's before. 

The wood was grey and the bark warping off it 

And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis 

Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle, 

What held it though on one side was a tree 

Still growing, and on one a stake and prop, 

These latter about to fall. I thought that only 

Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks 

Could so forget his handiwork on which 

He spent himself, the labour of his axe, 

And leave it there far from a useful fireplace 

To warm the frozen swamp as best it could 

With the slow smokeless burning of decay. 



GOOD HOURS 

I had for my winter evening walk 
No one at all with whom to talk, 
But I had the cottages in a row 
Up to their shining eyes in snow. 

And I thought I had the folk within: 
I had the sound of a violin; 
I had a glimpse through curtain laces 
Of youthful forms and youthful faces 

I had such company outward bound. 
I went till there were no cottages found. 
I turned and repented, but coming back 
I saw no window but that was black. 

Over the snow my creaking feet 
Disturbed the slumbering village street 
Like profanation, by your leave. 
At ten o'clock of a winter eve. 



114 



Mountain Interval 



THE ROAD NOT TAKEN 

1 wo roads diverged in a yellow wood, 
And sorry I could not travel both 
And be one traveler, long I stood 
And looked down one as far as I could 
To where it bent in the undergrowth; 

Then took the other, as just as fair, 
And having perhaps the better claim, 
Because it was grassy and wanted wear; 
Though as for that the passing there 
Had worn them really about the same, 

And both that morning equally lay 
In leaves no step had trodden black. 
Oh, I kept the first for another day! 
Yet knowing how way leads on to way, 
I doubted if I should ever come back. 

I shall be telling this with a sigh 
Somewhere ages and ages hence: 
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I 
I took the one less traveled by, 
And that has made all the difference. 



CHRISTMAS TREES 

A CHRISTMAS CIRCULAR LETTER 

The city had withdrawn into itself 

And left at last the country to the country; 

When between whirls of snow not come to lie 

And whirls of foliage not yet laid, there drove 

A stranger to our yard, who looked the city, 

Yet did in country fashion in that there 

He sat and waited till he drew us out 

A-buttoning coats to ask him who he was. 

He proved to be the city come again 

To look for something it had left behind 

And could not do without and keep its Christmas. 

He asked if I would sell my Christmas trees; 

My woods the young fir balsams like a place 

Where houses all are churches and have spires. 

I hadn't thought of them as Christmas trees. 

I doubt if I was tempted for a moment 

To sell them off their feet to go in cars 

And leave the slope behind the house all bare, 

Where the sun shines now no warmer than the moon. 

I'd hate to have them know it if I was. 

Yet more I'd hate to hold my trees except 

As others hold theirs or refuse for them, 

Beyond the time of profitable growth, 

The trial by market everything must come to. 

I dallied so much with the thought of selling. 

Then whether from mistaken courtesy 

118 



And fear of seeming short of speech, or whether 
From hope of hearing good of what was mine, 
I said, 'There aren't enough to be worth while/ 

'I could soon tell how many they would cut, 
You let me look them over/ 

'You could look. 

But don't expect I'm going to let you have them/ 
Pasture they spring in, some in clumps too close 
That lop each other of boughs, but not a few 
Quite solitary and having equal boughs 
All round and round. The latter he nodded 'Yes' to, 
Or paused to say beneath some lovelier one, 
With a buyer's moderation, 'That would do/ 
I thought so too, but wasn't there to say so. 
We climbed the pasture on the south, crossed over, 
And came down on the north. 

He said, 'A thousand/ 
'A thousand Christmas trees! at what apiece? J 

He felt some need of softening that to me: 

' A thousand trees would come to thirty dollars/ 

Then I was certain I had never meant 

To let him have them. Never show surprise! 

But thirty dollars seemed so small beside 

The extent of pasture I should strip, three cents 

119 



(For that was all they figured out apiece), 
Three cents so small beside the dollar friends 
I should be writing to within the hour 
Would pay in cities for good trees like those, 
Regular vestry-trees whole Sunday Schools 
Could hang enough on to pick off enough. 
A thousand Christmas trees I didn't know I had! 
Worth three cents more to give away than sell 
As may be shown by a simple calculation. 
Too bad I couldn't lay one in a letter. 
I can't help wishing I could send you one, 
In wishing you herewith a Merry Christmas. 



120 



AN OLD MAN'S WINTER NIGHT 

All out of doors looked darkly in at him 
Through the thin frost, almost in separate stars. 
That gathers on the pane in empty rooms. 
What kept his eyes from giving back the gaze 
Was the lamp tilted near them in his hand. 
What kept him from remembering the need 
That brought him to that creaking room was age. 
He stood with barrels round him at a loss. 
And having scared the cellar under him 
In clomping there, he scared it once again 
In clomping off;- and scared the outer night, 
Which has its sounds, familiar, like the roar 
Of trees and crack of branches, common things, 
But nothing so like beating on a box. 
A light he was to no one but himself 

aiHaO ' 

Where now he sat, concerned with he knew what, 

A quiet light, and then not even that. 

He consigned to the moon, such as she was, 

So late-arising, to the broken moon 

As better than the sun in any case 

For such a charge, his snow upon the roof, 

His icicles along the wall to keep; 

And slept. The log that shifted with a jolt 

Once in the stove, disturbed him and he shifted, 

And eased his heavy breathing, but still slept. 

One aged manone mancan't keep a house, 

12! 



A farm, a countryside, or if he can, 
It's thus he does it of a winter night. 



122 



THE TELEPHONE 

\Vhen I was just as far as I could walk 
From here to-day, 
There was an hour 
All still 

When leaning with my head against a flower 
I heard you talk. 

Don't say I didn't, for I heard you say 
You spoke from that flower on the window sill- 
Do you remember what it was you said?' 

'First tell me what it was you thought you heard.' 

' Having found the flower and driven a bee away, 

I leaned my head, 

And holding by the stalk, 

I listened and I thought I caught the word 

What was it? Did you call me by my name? 

Or did you say 

Someone said "Com^" I heard it as I bowed/ 

'I may have thought as much, but not aloudo ' 
' Well, so I came" 



123 



HYLA BROOK 

JDy June our brook's run out of song and speed. 

Sought for much after that, it will be found 

Either to have gone groping underground 

(And taken with it all the Hyla breed 

That shouted in the mist a month ago, 

Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow) - 

Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed, 

Weak foliage that is blown upon and bent 

Even against the way its waters went. 

Its bed is left a faded paper sheet 

Of dead leaves stuck together by the heat 

A brook to none but who remember long. 

This as it will be seen is other far 

Than with brooks taken otherwhere in song. 

We love the things we love for what they are. 



124 



THE OVEN BIRD 

1 here is a singer everyone has heard, 
Loud, a mid-summer and a mid- wood bird, 
Who makes the solid tree trunks sound again. 
He says that leaves are old and that for flowers 
Mid-summer is to spring as one to ten. 
Ke says the early petal-fall is past 
When pear and cherry bloom went down in showers 
On sunny days a moment overcast; 
And comes that other fall we name the fall. 
He says the highway dust is over all. 
The bird would cease and be as other birds 
But that he knows in singing not to sing. 
The question that he frames in all but words 
Is what to make of a diminished thing. 



BOND AND FREE 

.Love has earth to which she clings 
With hills and cii cling arms about- 
Wall within wall to shut fear out. 
But Thought has need of no such things, 
For Thought has a pair of dauntless wings. 

On snow and sand and turf, I see 
Where Love has left a printed trace 
With straining in the world's embrace. 
And such is Love and glad to be. 
But Thought has shaken his ankles free. 

Thought cleaves the interstellar gloom 
And sits in Sirius' disc all night, 
Till day makes him retrace his flight, 
With smell of burning on every plume, 
Back past the sun to an earthly room. 

His gains in heaven are what they are. 
Yet some say Love by being thrall 
And simply staying possesses all 
In several beauty that Thought fares far 
To find fused in another star. 



126 



Small good to anything growing wild, 
They were crooking many a trillium 

That had budded before the boughs v/ere piled 
And since it was coming up had to come. 



131 



PUTTING IN THE SEED 

You come to fetch me from my work to-night 

When supper's on the table, and we'll see 

If I can leave off burying the white 

Soft petals fallen from the apple tree 

(Soft petals, yes, but not so barren quite, 

Mingled with these, smooth bean and wrinkled pea;) 

And go along with you ere you lose sight 

Of what you came for and become like me, 

Slave to a springtime passion for the earth. 

How Love burns through the Putting in the Seed 

On through the watching for that early birth 

When, just as the soil tarnishes with weed, 

The sturdy seedling with arched body comes 
Shouldering its way and shedding the earth crumbs. 



A TIME TO TALK 

\Vhen a friend calls to me from the road 

And slows his horse to a meaning walk, 

I don't stand still and look around 

On all the hills I haven't hoed, 

And shout from where I am, 'What is it?' 

No, not as there is a time to talk. 

1 thrust my hoe in the mellow ground., 

Blade-end up and five feet tall, 

And plod. I go up to the stone wall 

For a friendly visit. 



133 



THE COW IN APPLE TIME 

oomething inspires the only cow of late 

To make no more of a wall than an open gate, 

And think no more of wall-builders than fools. 

Her face is flecked with pomace and she drools 

A cider syrup. Having tasted fruit, 

She scorns a pasture withering to the root. 

She runs from tree to tree where lie and sweeten 

The windfalls spiked with stubble and worm-eaten. 

She leaves them bitten when she has to fly. 

She bellows on a knoll against the sky. 

Her udder shrivels and the milk goes dry. 



134 



AN ENCOUNTER 

Once on the kind of day called < weather breeder/ 

When the heat slowly hazes and the sun 

By its own power seems to be undone, 

I was half boring through, half climbing through 

A swamp of cedar. Choked with oil of cedar 

And scurf of plants, and weary and over-heated, 

And sorry I ever left the road I knew, 

I paused and rested on a sort of hook 

That had me by the coat as good as seated, 

And since there was no other way to look, 

Looked up toward heaven, and there against the blue, 

Stood over me a resurrected tree, 

A tree that had been down and raised again 

A barkless spectre. He had halted too, 

As if for fear of treading upon me. 

I saw the strange position of his hands 

Up at his shoulders, dragging yellow strands 

Of wire with something in it from men to men. 

4 You here?' I said. 'Where aren't you nowadays? 

And what's the news you carry if you know? 

And tell me where you're off tor Montreal? 

Me? I'm not off for anywhere at all. 

Sometimes I wander out of beaten ways 

Half looking for the orchid Calypso/ 



135 



RANGE-FINDING 

The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strung 

And cut a flower beside a ground bird's nest 

Before it stained a single human breast. 

The stricken flower bent double and so hung. 

And still the bird revisited her young. 

A butterfly its fall had dispossessed 

A moment sought in air his flower of rest, 

Then lightly stooped to it and fluttering clung. 

On the bare upland pasture there had spread 
Overnight 'twixt mullein stalks a wheel of thread 
And straining cables wet with silver dew. 
A sudden passing bullet shook it dry. 
The indwelling spider ran to greet the fly, 
But finding nothing, sullenly withdrew. 



136 



THE HILL WIFE 

LONELINESS 
Her Word 

One ought not to have to care 

So much as you and I 
Care when the birds come round the house 

To seem to say good-bye; 

Or care so much when they come back 
With whatever it is they sing; 

The truth being we are as much 
Too glad for the one thing 

As we are too sad for the other here 
With birds that fill their breasts 

But with each other and themselves 
And their built or driven nests. 

HOUSE FEAR 

Always I tell you this they learned 
Always at night when they returned 
To the lonely house from far away 
To lamps unlighted and fire gone gray, 
They learned to rattle the lock and key 
To give whatever might chance to be 
Warning and time to be off in flight: 



And preferring the out- to the in-door night, 
They learned to leave the house-door wide 
Until they had lit the lamp inside. 

THE SMILE 
Her Word 

I didn't like the way he went away. 

That smile! It never came of being gay. 

Still he smileddid you see him? I was sure! 

Perhaps because we gave htm only bread 

And the wretch knew from that that we were poor 

Perhaps because he let us give instead 

Of seizing from us as he might have seized. 

Perhaps he mocked at us for being wed, 

Or being very young (and he was pleased 

To have a vision of us old and dead). 

I wonder how far down the road he's got. 

He's watching from the woods as like as not. 

THE OFT-REPEATED DREAM 

She had no saying dark enough 

For the dark pine that kept 
Forever trying the window-latch 

Of the room where they slept. 

The tireless but ineffectual hands 
That with every futile pass 



Made the great tree seem as a little bird 
Before the mystery of glass! 

It never had been inside the room, 

And only one of the two 
Was afraid in an oft-repeated dream 

Of what the tree might do. 



THE IMPULSE 

It was too lonely for her there, 

And too wild, 
And since there were but two of them, 

And no child, 

And work was little in the house. 

She was free, 
And followed where he furrowed field, 

Or felled tree. 

She rested on a log and tossed 

The fresh chips, 
With a song only to herself 

On her lips. 

And once she went to break a bough 

Of black alder. 
She strayed so far she scarcely heard 

When he called her 



139 



And didn't answer didn't speak 

Or return. 
She stood, and then she ran and hid 

In the fern. 

He never found her, though he looked 

Everywhere, 
And he asked at her mother's house 

V/as she there. 

Sudden and swift and light as that 

The ties gave, 
And he learned of finalities 

Besides the grave. 



140 



THE BONFIRE 



, let's go up the hill and scare ourselves, 
As reckless as the best of them to-night, 
By setting fire to all the brush we piled 
With pitchy hands to wait for rain or snow. 
Oh, let's not wait for rain to make it safe. 
The pile is ours: we dragged it bough on bough 
Down dark converging paths between the pines. 
Let's not care what we do with it to-night. 
Divide it? No! But burn it as one pile 
The way we piled it. And let's be the talk 
Of people brought to windows by a light 
Thrown from somewhere against their wall-paper. 
Rouse them all, both the free and not so free 
With saying what they'd like to do to us 
For what they'd better wait till we have done. 
Let's all but bring to life this old volcano, 
If that is what the mountain ever was 
And scare ourselves. Let wild fire loose we will . . 

'And scare you too?' the children said together. 

* Why wouldn't it scare me to have a fire 

Begin in smudge with ropy smoke and know 

That still, if I repent, I may recall it, 

But in a moment not: a little spurt 

Of burning fatness, and then nothing but 

The fire itself can put it out, and that 

141 



By burning out, and before it burns out 
It will have roared first and mixed sparks with stars > 
And sweeping round it with a flaming sword, 
Made the dim trees stand back in wider circle- 
Done so much and I know not how much more 
I mean it shall not do if I can bind it. 
Well if it doesn't with its draft bring on 
A wind to blow in earnest from some quarter, 
As once it did with me upon an April. 
The breezes were so spent with winter blowing 
They seemed to fail the bluebirds under them 
Short of the perch their languid flight was toward, 
And my flame made a pinnacle to heaven 
As I walked once around it in possession. 
But the wind out of doorsyou know the saying. 
There came a gust. You used to think the trees 
Made wind by fanning since you never knew 
It blow but that you saw the trees in motion. 
Something or someone watching made that gust. 
It put the flame tip-down and dabbed the grass 
Of over- winter with the least tip-touch 
Your tongue gives salt or sugar in your hand. 
The place it reached to blackened instantly. 
The black was almost all there was by day-light, 
That and the merest curl of cigarette smoke 
And a flame slender as the hepaticas, 
Blood-root, and violets so soon to be now. 
But the black spread like black death on the ground, 
And I think the sky darkened with a cloud 
Like winter and evening coming on together. 

142 



They were enough things to be thought of then. 
Where the field stretches toward the north 
And setting sun to Hyla brook, I gave it 
To flames without twice thinking, where it verges 
Upon the road, to flames too, though in fear 
They might find fuel there, in withered brake, 
Grass its full length, old silver golden-rod, 
And alder and grape vine entanglement, 
To leap the dusty deadline. For my own 
I took what front there was beside. I knelt 
And thrust hands in and held my face away. 
Fight such a fire by rubbing not by beating. 
A board is the best weapon if you have it. 
I had my coat. And oh, I knew, I knew, 
And said out loud, I couldn't bide the smother 
And heat so close in; but the thought of all 
The woods and town on fire by me, and all 
The town turned out to fight for me that held me. 
I trusted the brook barrier, but feared 
The road would fail; and on that side the fire 
Died not without a noise of crackling wood 
Of something more than tinder-grass and weed- 
That brought me to my feet to hold it back 
By leaning back myself, as if the reins 
Were round my neck and I was at the plough, 
I won! But I'm sure no one ever spread 
Another color over a tenth the space 
That I spread coal-black over in the time 
It took me. Neighbors coming home from town 
Couldn't believe that so much black had come there 

143 



While they had backs turned, that it hadn't been there 
When they had passed an hour or so before 
Going the other way and they not seen it. 
They looked about for someone to have done it. 
But there was no one. I was somewhere wondering 
Where all my weariness had gone and why 
I walked so light on air in heavy shoes 
In spite of a scorched Fourth-of-July feeling. 
Why wouldn't I be scared remembering that?' 

'If it scares you, what will it do to us?' 

'Scare you. But if you shrink from being scared, 
What would you say to war if it should come? 
That's what for reasons I should like to know 
If you can comfort me by any answer.' 

'Oh, but war's not for childrenit's for men.' 

'Now we are digging almost down to China. 

My dears, my dears, you thought that we all thought 

it. 

So your mistake was ours. Haven't you heard, though, 
About the ships where war has found them out 
At sea, about the towns where war has come 
Through opening clouds at night with droning speed 
Further o'erhead than all but stars and angels, 
And children in the ships and in the towns? 
Haven't you heard what we have lived to learn? 
Nothing so new something we had forgotten: 

144 



War is for everyone, for children too. 
I wasn't going to tell you and I mustn't. 
The best way is to come up hill with me 
And have our fire and laugh and be afraid/ 



145 



THE LAST WORD OF A BLUEBIRD 
AS TOLD TO A CHILD 

As I went out a Crow 

In a low voice said 'Oh ; 

I was looking for you. 

How do you do? 

I just came to tell you 

To tell Lesley (will you?) 

That her little Bluebird 

Wanted me to bring word 

That the north wind last night 

That made the stars bright 

And made ice on the trough 

Almost made him cough 

His tail feathers off. 

He just had to fly! 

But he sent her Good-bye, 

And said to be good, 

And wear her red hood, 

And look for skunk tracks 

In the snow with an axe 

And do everything! 

And perhaps in the spring 

He would come back and sing.' 



146 



'OUT, 



1 he buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yard 
And made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of 

wood, 

Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it. 
And from there those that lifted eyes could count 
Five mountain ranges one behind the other 
Under the sunset far into Vermont. 
And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled, 
As it ran light, or had to bear a load. 
And nothing happened: day was all but done. 
Call it a day, I wish they might have said 
To please the boy by giving him the half hour 
That a boy counts so much when saved from work. 
His sister stood beside them in her apron 
To tell them 'Supper.' At the word, the saw, 
As if to prove saws knew what supper meant, 
Leaped out at the boy's hand, or seemed to leap- 
He must have given the hand. However it was, 
Neither refused the meeting. But the hand! 
^ ne boy's first outcry was a rueful laugh, 
As he swung toward them holding up the hand 
Half in appeal, but half as if to keep 
The life from spilling. Then the boy saw ail- 
Since he was old enough to know, big boy 
Doing a man's work, though a child at heart- 
He saw all spoiled. 'Don't let him cut my hand off 
The doctor, when he comes. Don't let him, sister P 

147 



So. But the hand was gone already. 

The doctor put him in the dark of ether. 

He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath. 

And then the watcher at his pulse took fright. 

No one believed. They listened at his heart. 

Littleless nothing! and that ended it. 

No more to build on there. And they, since they 

Were not the one dead, turned to their affairs. 



148 



BROWN'S DESCENT 

OR 

THE WILLY-NILLY SLIDE 

Drown lived at such a lofty farm 
That everyone for miles could see 

His lantern when he did his chores 
In winter after half-past three. 

And many must have seen him make 
His wild descent from there one night, 

'Cross lots, 'cross walls, 'cross everything, 
Describing rings of lantern light. 

Between the house and barn the gale 
Got him by something he had on 

And blew him out on the icy crust 

That cased the world, and he was gone! 

Walls were all buried, trees were few: 

He saw no stay unless he stove 
A hole in somewhere with his heel. 

But though repeatedly he strove 

And stamped and said things to himself, 
And sometimes something seemed to yield, 

He gained no foothold, but pursued 
His journey down from field to field. 



149 



Sometimes he came with arms outspread 
Like wings, revolving in the scene 

Upon his longer axis, and 

With no small dignity of mien. 

Faster or slower as he chanced, 

Sitting or standing as he chose, 
According as he feared to risk 

His neck, or thought to spare his clothes, 

He never let the lantern drop. 

And some exclaimed who saw afar 
The figures he described with it, 

( I wonder what those signals are 

Brown makes at such an hour of night! 

He's celebrating something strange. 
I wonder if he's sold his farm, 

Or been made Master of the Grange/ 

He reeled, he lurched, he bobbed, he checked; 

He fell and made the lantern rattle 
(But saved the light from going out.) 

So half-way down he fought the battle, 

Incredulous of his own bad luck. 

And then becoming reconciled 
To everything, he gave it up 

And came down like a coasting child. 

150 



' Well-I-be-' that was all he said, 
As standing in the river road, 

He looked back up the slippery slope 
(Two miles it was) to his abode. 

Sometimes as an authority 
On motor-cars, Fm asked if I 

Should say our stock was petered out, 
And this is my sincere reply: 

Yankees are what they always were. 

Don't think Brown ever gave up hope 
Of getting home again because 

He couldn't climb that slippery slope; 

Or even thought of standing there 

Until the January thaw 
Should take the polish off the crust. 

He bowed with grace to natural law, 

And then went round it on his feet, 
After the manner of our stock; 

Not much concerned for those to whom, 
At that particular time o'clock, 

It must have looked as if the course 
He steered was really straight away 

From that which he was headed for 
Not much concerned for them, I say; 



151 



No more so than became a man 
And politician at odd seasons. 

I've kept Brown standing in the cold 
While I invested him with reasons; 

But now he snapped his eyes three times; 

Then shook his lantern, saying, He's 
'Bout out!' and took the long way home 

By road, a matter of several miles. 



152 



THE GUM-GATHERER 

There overtook me and drew me in 

To his down-hill, early-morning stride, 

And set me five miles on my road 

Better than if he had had me ride, 

A man with a swinging bag for load 

And half the bag wound round his hand. 

We talked like barking above the din 

Of water we walked along beside. 

And for my telling him where I'd been 

And where I lived in mountain land 

To be coming home the way I was, 

He told me a little about himself. 

He came from higher up in the pass 

Where the grist of the new-beginning brooks 

Is blocks split off the mountain mass 

And hopeless grist enough it looks 

Ever to grind to soil for grass. 

(The way it is will do for moss.) 

There he had built his stolen shack. 

It had to be a stolen shack 

Because of the fears of fire and loss 

That trouble the sleep of lumber folk: 

Visions of half the world burned black 

And the sun shrunken yellow in smoke. 

We know who when they come to town 

Bring berries under the wagon seat, 

Or a basket of eggs between their feet; 



153 



What this man brought in a cotton sack 
Was gum, the gum of the mountain spruce. 
He showed me lumps of the scented stuff 
Like uncut jewels, dull and rough. 
It conies to market golden brown; 
But turns to pink between the teeth. 

I told him this is a pleasant life 
To set your breast to the bark of trees 
That all your days are dim beneath, 
And reaching up with a little knife, 
To loose the resin and take it down 
And bring it to market when you please. 



154 



THE LINE-GANG 

Jriere come the line-gang pioneering by. 
They throw a forest down less cut than broken. 
They plant dead trees for living, and the dead 
They string together with a living thread. 
They string an instrument against the sky 
Wherein words whether beaten out or spoken 
Will run as hushed as when they were a thought. 
But in no hush they string it: they go past 
With shouts afar to pull the cable taut, 
To hold it hard until they make it fast, 
To ease away they have it. With a laugh, 
An oath of towns that set the wild at naught 
They bring the telephone and telegraph. 



155 



THE VANISHING RED 

lie is said to have been the last Red Man 

In Acton. And the Miller is said to have laughed 

If you like to call such a sound a laugh. 

But he gave no one else a laughter's license. 

For he turned suddenly grave as if to say, 

' Whose business,if I take it on myself, 

Whose businessbut why talk round the barn? 

When it's just that I hold with getting a thing done 

with. 

You can't get back and see it as he saw it. 
It's too long a story to go into now. 
You'd have to have been there and lived it. 
Then you wouldn't have looked on it as just a matter 
Of who began it between the two races. 

Some guttural exclamation of surprise 
The Red Man gave in poking about the mill 
Over the great big thumping shuffling mill-stone 
Disgusted the Miller physically as coming 
From one who had no right to be heard from. 
'Come, John/ he said, 'you want to see the wheel pit? > 

He took him down below a cramping rafter, 
And showed him, through a manhole in the floor, 
The water in desperate straits like frantic fish, 
Salmon and sturgeon, lashing with their tails. 
Then he shut down the trap door with a ring in it 

156 



That jangled even above the general noise, 
And came up stairs alone and gave that laugh, 
And said something to a man with a meal-sack 
That the man with the meal-sack didn't catch then. 
Oh, yes, he showed John the wheel pit all right. 



157 



SNOW 

1 he three stood listening to a fresh access 
Of wind that caught against the house a moment, 
Gulped snow, and then blew free again the Coles 
Dressed, but dishevelled from some hours of sleep, 
Meserve belittled in the great skin coat he wore. 

Meserve was first to speak. He pointed backward 
Over his shoulder with his pipe-stem, saying, 
* You can just see it glancing off the roof 
Making a great scroll upward toward the sky, 
Long enough for recording all our names on. 
I think Til just call up my wife and tell her 
I'm here so far and starting on again. 
I'll call her softly so that if she's wise 
And gone to sleep, she needn't wake to answer/ 
Three times he barely stirred the bell, then listened. 
'Why, Lett, still up? Lett, I'm at Cole's. I'm late. 
I called you up to say Good-night from here 
Before I went to say Good-morning there. 
I thought I would. I know, but, Lett I know 
I could, but what's the sense? The rest won't be 
So bad. Give me an hour for it. Ho, ho, 
Three hours to here! But that was all up hill; 
The rest is down. Why no, no, not a wallow: 
They kept their heads and took their time to it 
Like darlings, both of them. They're in the barn. 



158 



My dear, I'm coming just the same. I didn't 
Call you to ask you to invite me home. ' 
He lingered for some word she wouldn't say, 
Said it at last himself, * Good-night/ and then 
Getting no answer, closed the telephone. 
The three stood in the lamplight round the table 
With lowered eyes a moment till he said, 
Til just see how the horses are/ 

1 Yes, do/ 

Both the Coles said together. Mrs. Cole 
Added: ' You can judge better after seeing. 
I want you here with me, Fred. Leave him here, 
Brother Meserve. You know to find your way 
Out through the shed/ 

'I guess I know my way, 
I guess I know where I can find my name 
Carved in the shed to tell me who I am 
If it don't tell me where I am. I used 
To play' 

* You tend your horses and come back. 
Fred Cole, you're going to let him!' 

'Well, aren't you: 
How can you help yourself?' 

'I called him Brother. 
Why did I call him that?' 



159 



'It's right enough. 

That's all you ever heard him called round here. 
He seems to have lost off his Christian name/ 

'Christian enough I should call that myself. 

He took no notice, did he? Well, at least 

I didn't use it out of love of him, 

The dear knows. I detest the thought of him 

With his ten children under ten years old. 

I hate his wretched little Racker Sect, 

All's ever I heard of it, which isn't much. 

But that's not saying Look, Fred Cole, it's twelve, 

Isn't it, now? He's been here half an hour. 

He says he left the village store at nine. 

Three hours to do four miles a mile an hour 

Or not much better. Why, it doesn't seem 

As if a man could move that slow and move. 

Try to think what he did with all that time. 

And three miles more to go!' 

'Don't let him go. 

Stick to him, Helen. Make him answer you. 
That sort of man talks straight on all his life 
From the last thing he said himself, stone deaf 
To anything anyone else may say. 
I should have thought, though, you could make him 
hear you/ 

'What is he doing out a night like this? 
Why can't he stay at home?' 

16O 



'He had to preach/ 
'It's no night to be out.' 

'He may be small, 
He may be good, but one thing's sure, he's tough. 1 

'And strong of stale tobacco/ 

'He'll pull through.' 

'You only say so. Not another house 
Or shelter to put into from this place 
To theirs. I'm going to call his wife again.' 

' Wait and he may. Let's see what he will do. 
Let's see if he will think of her again. 
But then I doubt he's thinking of himself. 
He doesn't look on it as anything.' 

'He shan't go there!' 

'It is a night, my dear.' 
'One thing: he didn't drag God into it.' 
'He don't consider it a case for God.' 

'You think so, do you? You don't know the kind. 
He's getting up a miracle this minute. 

161 



Privatelyto himself, right now, he's thinking 
He*!! make a case of it if he succeeds, 
But keep still if he fails/ 

'Keep still all over. 
He'll be dead dead and buried/ 

'Such a trouble! 

Not but I've every reason not to care 
What happens to him if it only takes 
Some of the sanctimonious conceit 
Out of one of those pious scalawags/ 

'Nonsense to that! You want to see him safe/ 
"You like the runt/ 

'Don't you a little?' 

'Well, 

I don't like what he's doing, which is what 
You like, and like him for/ 

'Oh, yes you do. 

You like your fun as well as anyone; 
Only you women have to put these airs on 
To impress men. You've got us so ashamed 
Of being men we can't look at a good fight 
Between two boys and not feel bound to stop it. 
Let the man freeze an ear or two, I say. 

162 



He's here. I leave him all to you. Go in 

And save his life. All right, come in, Meserve. 

Sit down, sit down. How did you find the horses? 1 

Tine, fine/ 

t And ready for some more? My wife her 
Says it wont do. You've got to give it up/ 

'Won't you to please me? Please! If I say please? 
Mr. Meserve, I'll leave it to your wife. 
What did your wife say on the telephone?' 

Meserve seemed to heed nothing but the lamp 
Or something not far from it on the table. 
By straightening out and lifting a forefinger, 
He pointed with his hand from where it lay 
Like a white crumpled spider on his knee: 
'That leaf there in your open book! It moved 
Just then, I thought. It's stood erect like that, 
There on the table, ever since I came, 
Trying to turn itself backward or forward, 
I've had my eye on it to make out which; 
If forward, then it's with a friend's impatience 
You see I know to get you on to things 
It wants to see how you will take, if backward 
It's from regret for something you have passed 
And failed to see the good of. Never mind, 
Things must expect to come in front of us 
A many times I don't say just how many 

163 



That varies with the things before we see them. 

One of the lies would makfe it out that nothing 

Ever presents itself before us twice. 

Where would we be at last if that were so? 

Our very life depends on everything's 

Recurring till we answer from within. 

The thousandth time may prove the charm. That 

leaf! 

It can't turn either way. It needs the wind's help. 
But the wind didn't move it if it moved. 
It moved itself. The wind's at naught in here. 
It couldn't stir so sensitively poised 
A thing as that. It couldn't reach the lamp 
To get a puff of black smoke from the flame, 
Or blow a rumple in the collie's coat. 
You make a little foursquare block of air, 
Quiet and light and warm, in spite of all 
The illimitable dark and cold and storm, 
And by so doing give these three, lamp, dog, 
And book-leaf, that keep near you, their repose; 
Though for all anyone can tell, repose 
May be the thing you haven't, yet you give it. 
So false it is that what we haven't we can't give; 
So false, that what we always say is true. 
I'll have to turn the leaf if no one else will. 
It won't lie down. Then let it stand. Who cares?' 

1 shouldn't want to hurry you, Meserve, 
But if you're going Say you'll stay, you know* 
But let me raise this curtain on a scene, 

164 



And show you how it's piling up against you. 
You see the snow-white through the white of frost? 
Ask Helen how far up the sash it's climbed 
Since last we read the gage/ 

'It looks as if 

Some pallid thing had squashed its features flat 
And its eyes shut with overeagerness 
To see what people found so interesting 
In one another, and had gone to sleep 
Of its own stupid lack of understanding, 
Or broken its white neck of mushroom stuff 
Short off, and died against the window-pane/ 

'Brother Meserve, take care, you'll scare yourself 
More than you will us with such nightmare talk. 
It's you it matters to, because it's you 
Who have to go out into it alone.' 

'Let him talk, Helen, and perhaps he'll stay/ 

'Before you drop the curtain I'm reminded: 

You recollect the boy who came out here 

To breathe the air one winter had a room 

Down at the Averys'? Well, one sunny morning 

After a downy storm, he passed our place 

And found me banking up the house with snow. 

And I was burrowing in deep for warmth, 

Piling it well above the window-sills. 

The snow against the window caught his eye. 

165 



"Hey, that's a pretty thought " those were his 

words. 

"So you can think it's six feet deep outside, 
While you sit warm and read up balanced rations. 
You can't get too much winter in the winter." 
Those were his words. And he went home and all 
But banked the daylight out of Avery's windows. 
Now you and I would go to no such length. 
At the same time you can't deny it makes 
It not a mite worse, sitting here, we three, 
Playing our fancy, to have the snowliiie run 
So high across the pane outside. There where 
There is a sort of tunnel in the frost 
More like a tunnel than a hole way down 
At the far end of it you see a stir 
And quiver like the frayed edge of the drift 
Blown in the wind. I like that I like that. 
Well, now I leave you, people.' 

'Come, Meserve, 

We thought you were deciding not to go 
The ways you found to say the praise of comfort 
And being where you are. You want to stay/ 

Til own it's cold for such a fall of snow. 
This house is frozen brittle, all except 
This room you sit in. If you think the wind 
Sounds further off, it's not because it's dying; 
You're further under in the snow that's all 
\nd feel it less. Hear the soft bombs of dust 

166 



It bursts against us at the chimney mouth, 
And at the eaves. I like it from inside 
More than I shall out in it. But the horses 
Are rested and it's time to say good-night, 
And let you get to bed again. Good-night, 
Sorry I had to break in on your sleep/ 

* Lucky for you you did. Lucky for you 
You had us for a half-way station 
To stop at. If you were the kind of man 
Paid heed to women, you'd take my advice 
And for your family's sake stay where you are. 
But what good is my saying it over and over? 
You've done more than you had a right to think 
You could donoiu. You know the risk you take 
In going on.' 

'Our snow-storms as a rule 
Aren't looked on as man-killers, and although 
I'd rather be the beast that sleeps the sleep 
Under it all, his door sealed up and lost, 
Than the man fighting it to keep above it, 
Yet think of the small birds at roost and not 
In nests. Shall I be counted less than they are? 
Their bulk in water would be frozen rock 
In no time out to-night. And yet to-morrow 
They will come budding boughs from tree to tree 
Flirting their wings and saying Chickadee, 
As if not knowing what you meant by the word 
storm.' 

167 



'But why when no one wants you to go on? 
Your wifeshe doesn't want you to. We don't, 
And you yourself don't want to. Who else is there?' 

'Save us from being cornered by a woman. 

Well, there's' She told Fred afterward that in 

The pause right there, she thought the dreaded word 

Was coming, 'God/ But no, he only said 

' Well, there's the storm. That says I must go on. 

That wants me as a war might if it came. 

Ask any man/ 

He threw her that as something 
To last her till he got outside the door. 
He had Cole with him to the barn to see him off. 
When Cole returned he found his wife still standing 
Beside the table near the open book, 
Not reading it. 

'Well, what kind of a man 
Do you call that?' she said. 

'He had the gift 
Of words, or is it tongues, I ought to say? ; 

* Was ever such a man for seeing likeness?' 

'Ov disregarding people's civil questions 

What? We've found out in one hour more about him 

Than we had seeing him pass by in the road 

168 



A thousand times. If that's the way he preaches! 
You didn't think you'd keep him after all. 
Oh, I'm not blaming you. He didn't leave you 
Much say in the matter, and I'm just as glad 
We're not in for a night of him. No sleep 
If he had stayed. The least thing set him going. 
It's quiet as an empty church without him.' 

'But how much better off are we as it is? 
We'll have to sit here till we know he's safe.' 

'Yes, I suppose you'll want to, but I shouldn't. 
He knows what he can do, or he wouldn't try. 
Get into bed I say, and get some rest. 
He won't come back, and if he telephones, 
It won't be for an hour or two.' 

' Well then. 

We can't be any help by sitting here 
And living his fight through with him, I suppose.' 



Cole had been telephoning in the dark. 
Mrs. Cole's voice came from an inner room: 
'Did she call you or you call her?' 

'She me. 

You'd better dress: you won't go back to bed. 
We must have been asleep: it's three and after/ 

169 



'Had she been ringing long? FI1 get my wrapper. 
I want to speak to her/ 

'All she said was, 
He hadn't come and had he really started/ 

'She knew he had, poor thing, two hours ago/ 
'He had the shovel. He'll have made a fight/ 
'Why did I ever let him leave this house 1 / 

'Don't begin that. You did the best you could 
To keep him though perhaps you didn't quite 
Conceal a wish to see him show the spunk 
To disobey you. Much his wife'll thank you/ 

'Fred, after all I said! You shan't make out 
That it was any way but what it was. 
Did she let on by any word she said 
She didn't thank me?' 

'When I told her "Gone," 

ll Wdlthcn/ > shcsaid,and"Wcllthcn"-likcathrcat. 
And then her voice came scraping slow: "Oh, you, 
Why did you let him go?" ' 

'Asked why we let him? 
You let me there. Fll ask her why she let him. 

170 



She didn't dare to speak when he was here 

Their number's twenty-one? The thing won't work 

Someone's receiver's down. The handle stumbles. 

The stubborn thing, the way it jars your arm! 

It's theirs. She's dropped it from her hand and gone, 

Try speaking. Say "Hello!" ' 

'Hello. Hello/ 
'What do you hear?' 

'I hear an empty room 

You know it sounds that way. And yes, I hear 
I think I hear a clock and windows rattling. 
No step though. If she's there she's sitting down/ 

'Shout; she may hear you/ 

'Shouting is no good/ 
'Keep speaking then/ 

'Hello. Hello. Hello. 
You don't suppose? She wouldn't go out doors?' 

Tm half afraid that's just what she might do/ 

'And leave the children?' 

171 



' Wait and call again. 

You can't hear whether she has left the door 
Wide open and the wind's blown out the lamp 
And the fire's died and the room's dark and cold?' 

'One of two things, either she's gone to bed 
Or gone out doors.' 

'In which case both are lost. 

Do you know what she's like? Have you ever met her? 
It's strange she doesn't want to speak to us/ 

'Fred, see if you can hear what I hear. Come/ 
'A clock maybe/ 

'Don't you hear something else?' 
'Not talking/ 

'No/ 

' Why, yes, I hear what is it?' 
' What do you say it is?' 

'A baby's crying! 

Frantic it sounds, though muffled and far off. 
Its mother wouldn't let it cry like that, 
Not if she's there/ 

172 



* What do you make of it?' 

there's only one thing possible to make, 

That is, assuming that she has gone out. 

Of course she hasn't though.' They both sat down 

Helpless. 'There's nothing we can do till morning.' 

'Fred, I shan't let you think of going out/ 

'Hold on/ The double bell began to chirp. 

They started up. Fred took the telephone. 

'Hello, Meserve. You're there, then! And your wife? 

Good! Why I asked she didn't seem to answer. 

He says she went to let him in the barn. 

We're glad. Oh, say no more about it, man. 

Drop in and see us when you're passing.' 

'Well, 

She has him then, though what she wants him for 
I don't see.' 

'Possibly not for herself. 
Maybe she only wants him for the children/ 

'The whole to-do seems to have been for nothing. 
What spoiled our night was to him just his fun. 
What did he come in for? To talk and visit? 
Thought he'd just call to tell us it was snowing. 
If he thinks he is going to make our house 
A half-way coffee house 'twixt town and nowhere' 

173 



'I thought you'd feel you'd been too much concerned 
'You think you haven't been concerned yourself.' 

'If you mean he was inconsiderate 
To rout us out to think for him at midnight 
And then take our advice no more than nothing, 
Why, I agree with you. But let's forgive him. 
We've had a share in one night of his life. 
What'll you bet he ever calls again?' 



174 



THE SOUND OF THE TREES 

I wonder about the trees. 

Why do we wish to bear 

Forever the noise of these 

More than another noise 

So close to our dwelling place? 

We suffer them by the day 

Till we lose all measure of pace, 

And fixity in our joys, 

And acquire a listening air. 

They are that that talks of going 

But never gets away; 

And that talks no less for knowing, 

As it grows wiser and older, 

That now it means to stay. 

My feet tug at the floor 

And my head sways to my shoulder 

Sometimes when I watch trees sway, 

From the window or the door. 

I shall set forth for somewhere, 

I shall make the reckless choice 

Some day when they are in voice 

And tossing so as to scare 

The white clouds over them on. 

I shall have less to say, 

But I shall be gone. 



175 



New Hampshire 



NEW HAMPSHIRE 

1 met a lady from the South who said 
(You won't believe she said it, but she said it): 
'None of my family ever worked, or had 
A thing to sell/ I don't suppose the work 
Much matters. You may work for all of me. 
I've seen the time I've had to work myself. 
The having anything to sell is what 
Is the disgrace in man or state or nation. 

I met a traveller from Arkansas 

Who boasted of his state as beautiful 

For diamonds and apples. 'Diamonds 

And apples in commercial quantities?' 

I asked him, on my guard. ( Oh yes/ he answered, 

Off his. The time was evening in the Pullman. 

'I see the porter's made your bed/ I told him. 

I met a Californian who would 

Talk California a state so blessed, 

He said, in climate, none had ever died there 

A natural death, and Vigilance Committees 

Had had to organize to stock the graveyards 

And vindicate the state's humanity. 

'Just the way Steffanson runs on/ I murmured, 

'About the British Arctic. That's what comes 

Of being in the market with a climate.' 

179 



I met a poet from another state, 
A zealot full of fluid inspiration, 
Who in the name of fluid inspiration, 
But in the best style of bad salesmanship, 
Angrily tried to make me write a protest 
(In verse I think) against the Volstead Act. 
He didn't even offer me a drink 
Until I asked for one to steady him. 
This is called having an idea to sell. 

It never could have happened in New Hampshire. 

The only person really soiled with trade 

I ever stumbled on in old New Hampshire 

Was someone who had just come back ashamed 

From selling things in California. 

He'd built a noble mansard roof with balls 

On turrets like Constantinople, deep 

In woods some ten miles from a railroad station, 

As if to put forever out of mind 

The hope of being, as we say, received. 

I found him standing at the close of day 

Inside the threshold of his open barn, 

Like a lone actor on a gloomy stage 

&nd recognized him through the iron grey 

In which his face was muffled to the eyes 

As an old boyhood friend, and once indeed 

A drover with me on the road to Brighton. 

His farm was 'grounds,' and not a farm at all; 

His house among the local sheds and shanties 

180 



Rose like a factor's at a trading station. 

And he was rich, and I was still a rascal. 

I couldn't keep from asking impolitely, 

Where had he been and what had he been doing? 

How did he get so? (Rich was understood.) 

In dealing in 'old rags' in San Francisco. 

Oh it was terrible as well could be. 

We both of us turned over in our graves. 

Just specimens is all New Hampshire has, 

One each of everything as in a show-case 

Which naturally she doesn't care to sell 

She had one President (pronounce him Purse, 
And make the most of it for better or worse. 
He's your one chance to score against the state), 
She had one Daniel Webster. He was all 
The Daniel Webster ever was or shall be. 
She had the Dartmouth needed to produce him. 

I call her old. She has one family 
Whose claim is good to being settled here 
Before the era of colonization, 
And before that of exploration even. 
John Smith remarked them as he coasted by 
Dangling their legs and fishing off a wharf 
At the Isles of Shoals, and satisfied himself 
They weren't Red Indians, but veritable 
Pre-primitives of the white race, dawn people, 
Like those who furnished Adam's sons with 
wives; 



However uninnocent they may have been 

In being there so early in our history. 

They'd been there then a hundred years or more. 

Pity he didn't ask what they were up to 

At that date with a wharf already built, 

And take their name. They've since told me their 

name- 
Today an honored one in Nottingham. 
As for what they were up to more than fishing- 
Suppose they weren't behaving Puritanly, 
The hour had not yet struck for being good, 
Mankind had not yet gone on the Sabbatical. 
It became an explorer of the deep 
Not to explore too deep in others' business. 
Did you but know of him, New Hampshire has. 
One real reformer who would change the world 
So it would be accepted by two classes, 
Artists the minute they set up as artists, 
Before, that is, they are themselves accepted, 
And boys the minute they get out of college. 
I can't help thinking those are tests to go by. 

And she has one I don't know what to call him, 
Who comes from Philadelphia every year 
With a great flock of chickens of rare breeds 
He wants to give the educational 
Advantages of growing almost wild 
Under the watchful eye of hawk and eagle- 
Dorkings because they're spoken of by Chaucer 
Sussex because they're spoken of by Herrick. 

182 



She has a touch of gold. New Hampshire gold 

You may have heard of it. I had a farm 

Offered me not long since up Berlin way 

With a mine on it that was worked for gold; 

But not gold in commercial quantities. 

Just enough gold to make the engagement rings 

And marriage rings of those who owned the farm. 

What gold more innocent could one have asked for? 

One of my children ranging after rocks 

Lately brought home from Andover or Canaan 

A specimen of beryl with a trace 

Of radium. I know with radium 

The trace would have to be the merest trace 

To be below the threshold of commercial; 

But trust New Hampshire not to have enough 

Of radium or anything to sell. 

A specimen of everything, I said. 

She has one witch old style. She lives in Colebrook. 

(The only other witch I ever met 

Was lately at a cut-glass dinner in Boston. 

There were four candles and four people present. 

The witch was young, and beautiful (new style), 

And open-minded. She was free to question 

Her gift for reading letters locked in boxes. 

Why was it so much greater when the boxes 

Were metal than it was when they were wooden? 

It made the world seem so mysterious. 

The S'ciety for Psychical Research 

Was cognizant. Her husband was worth millions. 

I think he owned some shares in Harvard College.) 

183 



New Hampshire used to have at Salem 

A company we called the White Corpuscles, 

Whose duty was at any hour of night 

To rush in sheets and fools* caps where they smelled 

A thing the least bit doubtfully perscented 

And give someone the Skipper Ireson's Ride. 

One each of everything as in a show-case. 

More than enough land for a specimen 

You'll say she has, but there there enters in 

Something else to protect her from herself. 

There quality makes up for quantity. 

Not even New Hampshire farms are much for sale. 

The farm I made my home on in the mountains 

I had to take by force rather than buy. 

I caught the owner outdoors by himself 

Raking up after winter, and I said, 

I'm going to put you off this farm: I want it/ 

* Where are you going to put me? In the road?* 

Tm going to put you on the farm next to it.' 

Why won't the farm next to it do for you?' 

1 like this better/ It was really better. 

Apples? New Hampshire has them, but unsprayed, 

With no suspicion in stem-end or blossom-end 

Of vitriol or arsenate of lead, 

And so not good for anything but cider. 

Her unpruned grapes are flung like lariats 

Far up the birches out of reach of man. 

184 



A state producing precious metals, stones, 
And writing; none of these except perhaps 
The precious literature in quantity 
Or quality to worry the producer 
About disposing of it. Do you know, 
Considering the market, there are more 
Poems produced than any other thing? 
No wonder poets sometimes have to seem 
So much more business-like than business men. 
Their wares are so much harder to get rid of. 

She's one of the two best states in the Union. 

Vermont's the other. And the two have been 

Yoke-fellows in the sap-yoke from of old 

In many Marches. And they lie like wedges, 

Thick end to thin end and thin end to thick end, 

And are a figure of the way the strong 

Of mind and strong of arm should fit together, 

One thick where one is thin and vice versa. 

New Hampshire raises the Connecticut 

In a trout hatchery near Canada, 

But soon divides the river with Vermont. 

Both are delightful states for their absurdly 

Small townsLost Nation, Bungey, Muddy Boo, 

Poplin, Still Corners (so called not becaiise 

The place is silent all day long, nor yet 

Because it boasts a whisky still because 

It set out once to be a city and still 

Is only corners, cross- roads in a wood). 

185 



And I remember one whose name appeared 
Between the pictures on a movie screen 
Election night once in Franconia, 
When everything had gone Republican 
And Democrats were sore in need of comfort: 
Easton goes Democratic, Wilson 4 
Hughes 2. And everybody to the saddest 
Laughed the loud laugh, the big laugh at the little. 
New York (five million) laughs at Manchester, 
Manchester (sixty or seventy thousand) laughs 
At Littleton (four thousand), Littleton 
Laughs at Franconia (seven hundred), and 
Franconia laughs, I fear, -did laugh that night 
At Easton. What has Easton left to laugh at, 
And like the actress exclaim, 'Oh my God' at? 
There's Bungey; and for Bungey there are towns, 
Whole townships named but without population. 

Anything I can say about New Hampshire 
Will serve almost as well about Vermont, 
Excepting that they differ in their mountains. 
The Vermont mountains stretch extended straight; 
New Hampshire mountains curl up in a coil. 

I had been coming to New Hampshire mountains. 

And here I am and what am I to say? 

Here first my theme becomes embarrassing. 

Emerson said, 'The God who made New Hampshire 

Taunted the lofty land with little men.' 

Another Massachusetts poet said, 

186 



'I go no more to summer in New Hampshire. 

IVe given up my summer place in Dublin/ 

But when I asked to know what ailed New Hampshire. 

She said she couldn't stand the people in it, 

The little men (it's Massachusetts speaking). 

And when I asked to know what ailed the people, 

She said, 'Go read your own books and find out.' 

I may as well confess myself the author 

Of several books against the world in general. 

To take them as against a special state 

Or even nation's to restrict my meaning. 

I'm what is called a sensibilitist, 

Or otherwise an environmentalist. 

I refuse to adapt myself a mite 

To any change from hot to cold, from wet 

To dry, from poor to rich, or back again. 

I make a virtue of my suffering 

From nearly everything that goes on round me. 

In other words, I know wherever I am, 

Being the creature of literature I am, 

I shall not lack for pain to keep me awake. 

Kit Marlowe taught me how to say my prayers: 

'Why, this is Hell, nor am I out of it/ 

Samoa, Russia, Ireland I complain of, 

No less than England, France and Italy. 

Because I wrote my novels in New Hampshire 

Is no proof that I aimed them at New Hampshire. 



When I left Massachusetts years ago 
Between two days, the reason why I sought 



187 



New Hampshire, not Connecticut, 

Rhode Island, New York, or Vermont was this: 

Where I was living then, New Hampshire offered 

The nearest boundary to escape across. 

I hadn't an illusion in my hand-bag 

About the people being better there 

Than those I left behind. I thought they weren't. 

I thought they couldn't be. And yet they were. 

I'd sure had no such friends in Massachusetts 

As Hall of Windham, Gay of Atkinson, 

Bartlett of Raymond (now of Colorado), 

Harris of Derry, and Lynch of Bethlehem 

The glorious bards of Massachusetts seem 

To want to make New Hampshire people over. 

They taunt the lofty land with little men. 

I don't know what to say about the people. 

For art's sake one could almost wish them worse 

Rather than better. How are we to write 

The Russian novel in America 

As long as life goes so unterribly? 

There is the pinch from which our only outcry 

In literature to date is heard to come. 

We get what little misery we can 

Out of not having cause for misery. 

It makes the guild of novel writers sick 

To be expected to be Dostoievskis 

On nothing worse than too much luck and comfort. 

This is not sorrow, though; it's just the vapors, 

And recognized as such in Russia itself 

188 



Under the new regime, and so forbidden. 
If well it is with Russia, then feel free 
To say so or be stood against the wall 
And shot. It's Pollyanna now or death. 
This, then, is the new freedom we hear tell of; 
And very sensible. No state can build 
A literature that shall at once be sound 
And sad on a foundation of well-being, 

To show the level of intelligence 

Among us: it was just a Warren farmer 

Whose horse had pulled him short up in the road 

By me, a stranger. This is what he said, 

From nothing but embarrassment and want 

Of anything more sociable to say: 

' You hear those hound-dogs sing on Moosilauke? 

Well they remind me of the hue and cry 

We've heard against the Mid- Victorians 

And never rightly understood till Bryan 

Retired from politics and joined the chorus. 

The matter with the Mid- Victorians 

Seems to have been a man named John L. Darwin/ 

'Go 'long/ I said to him, he to his horse. 

I knew a man who failing as a farmer 

Burned down his farmhouse for the fire insurance. 

And spent the proceeds on a telescope 

To satisfy a life-long curiosity 

About our place among the infinities. 

And how was that for other-worldliness? 

189 



If I must choose which I would elevate 
The people or the already lofty mountains, 
Td elevate the already lofty mountains. 
The only fault I find with old New Hampshire 
Is that her mountains aren't quite high enough. 
I was not always so; I've come to be so. 
How, to my sorrow, how have I attained 
A height from which to look down critical 
On mountains? What has given me assurance 
To say what height becomes New Hampshire moun- 
tains, 

Or any mountains? Can it be some strength 
I feel as of an earthquake in my back 
To heave them higher to the morning star? 
Can it be foreign travel in the Alps? 
Or having seen and credited a moment 
The solid moulding of vast peaks of cloud 
Behind the pitiful reality 
Of Lincoln, Lafayette and Liberty? 
Or some such sense as says how high shall jet 
The fountain in proportion to the basin? 
No, none of these has raised me to my throne 
Of intellectual dissatisfaction, 
But the sad accident of having seen 
Our actual mountains given in a map 
Of early times as twice the height they are- 
Ten thousand feet instead of only five 
Which shows how sad an accident may be. 
Five thousand is no longer high enough. 
Whereas I never had a good idea 

190 



About improving people in the world, 

Here I am over-fertile in suggestion, 

And cannot rest from planning day or night 

How high Fd thrust the peaks in summer snow 

To tap the upper sky and draw a flow 

Of frosty night air on the vale below 

Down from the stars to freeze the dew as starry. 

The more the sensibilitist I am 
The more I seem to want my mountains wild; 
The way the wiry gang-boss liked the log-jam. 
After he'd picked the lock and got it started, 
He dodged a log that lifted like an arm 
Against the sky to break his back for him, 
Then came in dancing, skipping, with his life 
Across the roar and chaos, and the words 
We saw him say along the zigzag journey 
Were doubtless as the words we heard him say 
On coming nearer: 'Wasn't she an i-deal 
Son-of-a-bitch? You bet she was an t-deal.' 

For all her mountains fall a little short, 
Her people not quite short enough for Art, 
She's still New Hampshire, a most restful state. 

Lately in converse with a New York alec 
About the new school of the pseudo-phallic, 
I found myself in a close corner where 
I had to make an almost funny choice. 
'Choose you which you will bea prude, or puke, 

191 



Mewling and puking in the public arms/ 
'Me for the hills where I don't have to choose/ 
'But if you had to choose, which would you be?' 
I wouldn't be a prude afraid of nature. 
I know a man who took a double axe 
And went alone against a grove of trees; 
But his heart failing him, he dropped the axe 
And ran for shelter quoting Matthew Arnold: 
'Nature is cruel, man is sick of blood; 
There's been enough shed without shedding mine. 
Remember Birnam Wood! The wood's in flux!' 
He had a special terror of the flux 
That showed itself in dendrophobia. 
The only decent tree had been to mill 
And educated into boards, he said. 
He knew too well for any earthly use 
The line where man leaves off and nature starts, 
And never over-stepped it save in dreams. 
He stood on the safe side of the line talking; 
Which is sheer Matthew Arnoldism, 
The cult of one who owned himself 'a foiled, 
Circuitous wanderer,' and 'took dejectedly 
His seat upon the intellectual throne/ 
Agreed in frowning on these improvised 
Altars the woods are full of nowadays, 
Again as in the days when Ahaz sinned 
By worship under green trees in the open. 
Scarcely a mile but that I come on one, 
A black-cheeked stone and stick of rain-washed 
charcoal 

192 



Even to say the groves were God's first temples 

Comes too near to Ahaz' sin for safety. 

Nothing not built with hands of course is sacred. 

But here is not a question of what's sacred; 

Rather of what to face or run away from. 

I'd hate to be a runaway from nature. 

And neither would I choose to be a puke 

Who cares not what he does in company, 

And, when he can't do anything, falls back 

On words, and tries his worst to make words speak 

Louder than actions, and sometimes achieves it. 

It seems a narrow choice the age insists on. 

How about being a good Greek, for instance? 

That course, they tell me, isn't offered this year. 

'Come, but this isn't choosing puke or prude?' 

Well, if I have to choose one or the other, 

I choose to be a plain New Hampshire farmer 

With an income in cash of say a thousand 

(From say a publisher in New York City). 

It's restful to arrive at a decision, 

And restful just to think about New Hampshire. 

At present I am living in Vermont. 



193 



A STAR IN A STONE-BOAT 
(For Lincoln MacVeagh) 

L Sever tell me that not one star of all 

That slip from heaven at night and softly fall 

Has been picked up with stones to build a wall. 

Some laborer found one faded and stone cold, 
And saving that its weight suggested gold, 
And tugged it from his first too certain hold, 

He noticed nothing in it to remark. 

He was not used to handling stars thrown dark 

And lifeless from an interrupted arc. 

He did not recognize in that smooth coal 
The one thing palpable besides the soul 
To penetrate the air in which we roll. 

He did not see how like a flying thing 

It brooded ant-eggs, and had one large wing, 

One not so large for flying in a ring, 

And a long Bird of Paradise's tail, 

(Though these when not in use to fly and trail 

It drew back in its body like a snail); 

Nor know that he might move it from the spot, 
The harm was done; from having been star-shot 
The very nature of the soil was hot 

194 



And burning to yield flowers instead of grain, 
Flowers fanned and not put out by all the rain 
Poured on them by his prayers prayed in vain. 

He moved it roughly with an iron bar, 
He loaded an old stone-boat with the star 
And not, as you might think, a flying car, 

Such as even poets would admit perforce 
More practical than Pegasus the horse 
If it could put a star back in its course. 

He dragged it through the ploughed ground at a pace 
But faintly reminiscent of the race 
Of jostling rock in interstellar space. 

It went for building stone, and I, as though 

Commanded in a dream, forever go 

To right the wrong that this should have been so. 

Yet ask where else it could have gone as well, 
I do not know I cannot stop to tell: 
He might have left it lying where it fell. 

From following walls I never lift my eye 
Except at night to places in the sky 
Where showers of charted meteors let fly. 



195 



Some may know what they seek in school and church, 
And why they seek it there; for what I search 
I must go measuring stone walls, perch on perch; 

Sure that though not a star of death and birth, 
So not to be compared, perhaps, in worth 
To such resorts of life as Mars and Earth, 

Though not, I say, a star of death and sin, 
It yet has poles, and only needs a spin 
To show its worldly nature and begin 

To chafe and shuffle in my calloused palm 
And run off in strange tangents with my arm 
As fish do with the line in first alarm. 

Such as it is, it promises the prize 
Of the one world complete in any size 
That I am like to compass, fool or wise. 



THE CENSUS-TAKER 

1 came an errand one cloud-blowing evening 

To a slab-built, black-paper-covered house 

Of one room and one window and one door, 

The only dwelling in a waste cut over 

A hundred square miles round it in the mountains: 

And that not dwelt in now by men or women. 

(Ir never had been dwelt in, though, by women, 

So what is this I make a sorrow of?) 

I came as census-taker to the waste 

To count the people in it and found none, 

None in the hundred miles, none in the house, 

Where I came last with some hope, but not much 

After hours' overlooking from the cliffs 

An emptiness flayed to the very stone. 

I found no people that dared show themselves, 

None not in hiding from the outward eye. 

The time was autumn, but how anyone 

Could tell the time of year when every tree 

That could have dropped a leaf was down itself 

And nothing but the stump of it was left 

Now bringing out its rings in sugar of pitch; 

And every tree up stood a rotting trunk 

Without a single leaf to spend on autumn, 

Or branch to whistle after what was spent. 

Perhaps the wind the more without the help 

Of breathing trees said something of the time 

Of year or day the way it swung a door 

197 



Forever off the latch, as if rude men 

Passed in and slammed it shut each one behind him 

For the next one to open for himself. 

I counted nine I had no right to count 

(But this was dreamy unofficial counting) 

Before I made the tenth across the threshold. 

Where was my supper? Where was anyone's? 

No lamp was lit. Nothing was on the table. 

The stove was cold the stove was off the chimney 

And down by one side where it lacked a leg. 

The people that had loudly passed the door 

Were people to the ear but not the eye. 

They were not on the table with their elbows. 

They were not sleeping in the shelves of bunks. 

I saw no men there and no bones of men there. 

I armed myself against such bones as might be 

With the pitch-blackened stub of an axe-handle 

I picked up off the straw-dust covered floor. 

Not bones, but the ill-fitted window rattled. 

The door was still because I held it shut 

While I thought what to do that could be done 

About the house about the people not there. 

This house in one year fallen to decay 

Filled me with no less sorrow than the houses 

Fallen to ruin in ten thousand years 

Where Asia wedges Africa from Europe. 

Nothing was left to do that I could see 

Unless to find that there was no one there 

And declare to the cliffs too far for echo, 

f The place is desert and let whoso lurks 

198 



In silence, if in this he is aggrieved, 

Break silence now or be forever silent. 

Let him say why it should not be declared so/ 

The melancholy of having to count souls 

Where they grow fewer and fewer every year 

Is extreme where they shrink to none at all. 

It must be I want life to go on living. 



199 



THE STAR-SPLITTER 

< You know Orion always comes up sideways. 
Throwing a leg up over our fence of mountains. 
And rising on his hands, he looks in on me 
Busy outdoors by lantern-light with something 
I should have done by daylight, and indeed, 
After the ground is frozen, I should have done 
Before it froze, and a gust flings a handful 
Of waste leaves at my smoky lantern chimney 
To make fun of my way of doing things, 
Or else fun of Orion's having caught me. 
Has a man, I should like to ask, no rights 
These forces are obliged to pay respect to?' 
So Brad McLaughlin mingled reckless talk 
Of heavenly stars with hugger-mugger farming, 
Till having failed at hugger-mugger farming, 
He burned his house down for the fire insurance 
And spent the proceeds on a telescope 
To satisfy a life-long curiosity 
About our place among the infinities. 

What do you want with one of those blame things?' 

I asked him well beforehand. 'Don't you get one!' 

'Don't call it blamed; there isn't anything 

More blameless in the sense of being less 

A weapon in our human fight/ he said. 

Til have one if I sell my farm to buy it.' 

There where he moved the rocks to plow the ground 

200 



And plowed between the rocks he couldn't move, 

Few farms changed hands; so rather than spend years 

Trying to sell his farm and then not selling, 

He burned his house down for the fire insurance 

And bought the telescope with what it came to. 

He had been heard to say by several: 

'The best thing that we're put here for's to see; 

The strongest thing that's given us to see with's 

A telescope. Someone in every town 

Seems to me owes it to the town to keep one. 

In Littleton it may as well be me/ 

After such loose talk it was no surprise 

When he did what he did and burned his house down, 

Mean laughter went about the town that day 

To let him know we weren't the least imposed on, 

And he could wait we'd see to him to-morrow. 

But the first thing next morning we reflected 

If one by one we counted people out 

For the least sin, it wouldn't take us long 

To get so we had no one left to live with. 

For to be social is to be forgiving. 

Our thief, the one who does our stealing from us,s, 

We don't cut off from coming to church supper 

But what we miss we go to him and ask for. 

He promptly gives it back, that is if still 

Uneaten, unworn out, or undisposed of. 

It wouldn't do to be too hard on Brad 

About his telescope. Beyond the age 

Of being given one's gift for Christmas, 

2O1 



He had to take the best way he knew how 
To find himself in one. \Vell, all we said was 
He took a strange thing to be roguish over. 
Some sympathy was wasted on the house, 
A good old-timer dating back along; 
But a house isn't sentient; the house 
Didn't feel anything. And if it did, 
Why not regard it as a sacrifice, 
And an old-fashioned sacrifice by fire, 
Instead of a new-fashioned one at auction? 

Out of a house and so out of a farm 

At one stroke (of a match), Brad had to turn 

To earn a living on the Concord railroad, 

As under-ticket-agent at a station 

Where his job, when he wasn't selling tickets, 

\Vas setting out up track and down, not plants 

As on a farm, but planets, evening stars 

That varied in their hue from red to green. 

He got a good glass for six hundred dollars. 

His new job gave him leisure for star-gazing 

Often he bid me come and have a look 

Up the brass barrel, velvet black inside, 

At a star quaking in the other end. 

I recollect a night of broken clouds 

And underfoot snow melted down to ice, 

And melting further in the wind to mud. 

Bradford and I had out the telescope. 

^Ve spread our two legs as we spread its three, 

202 



Pointed our thoughts the way we pointed it, 

And standing at our leisure till the day broke, 

Said some of the best things we ever said. 

That telescope was christened the Star-splitter, 

Because it didn't do a thing but split 

A star in two or three the way you split 

A globule of quicksilver in your hand 

With one stroke of your finger in the middle. 

It's a star-splitter if there ever was one 

And ought to do some good if splitting stars 

'Sa thing to be compared with splitting wood. 

We've looked and looked, but after all where are we? 

Do we know any better where we are, 

And how it stands between the night to-night 

And a man with a smoky lantern chimney? 

How different from the way it ever stood? 



203 



THE AXE-HELVE 

I've known ere now an interfering branch 

Of alder catch my lifted axe behind me. 

But that was in the woods, to hold my hand 

From striking at another alder's roots, 

And that was, as I say, an alder branch. 

This was a man, Baptiste, who stole one day 

Behind me on the snow in my own yard 

Where I was working at the chopping-block, 

And cutting nothing not cut down already. 

He caught my axe expertly on the rise, 

When all my strength put forth was in his favor, 

Held it a moment where it was, to calm me, 

Then took it from me and I let him take it. 

I didn't know him well enough to know 

What it was all about. There might be something 

He had in mind to say to a bad neighbor 

He might prefer to say to him disarmed. 

But all he had to tell me in French-English 

Was what he thought of not me, but my axe; 

Me only as I took my axe to heart. 

It was the bad axe-helve some one had sold me 

'Made on machine/ he said, ploughing the grain 

With a thick thumbnail to show how it ran 

Across the handle's long drawn serpentine, 

Like the two strokes across a dollar sign. 

'You give her one good crack, she's snap raght off. 

Den where's your hax-ead flying through de hair?' 

Admitted; and yet, what was that to him? 

204 



'Come on my house and I put you one in 

What's las' awhile good hick'ry what's grow 

crooked, 

De second growt' I cut myself tough, tough!' 
Something to sell? That wasn't how it sounded. 

'Den when you say you come? It's cost you nothing 
To-naght?' 

As well to-night as any night. 

Beyond an over-warmth of kitchen stove 

My welcome differed from no other welcome. 

Baptiste knew best why I was where I was. 

So long as he would leave enough unsaid, 

I shouldn't mind his being overjoyed 

(If overjoyed he was) at having got me 

Where I must judge if what he knew about an axe 

That not everybody else knew was to count 

For nothing in the measure of a neighbor. 

Hard if, though cast away for life with Yankees, 

A Frenchman couldn't get his human rating! 

Mrs. Baptiste came in and rocked a chair 
That had as many motions as the world: 
One back and forward, in and out of shadow, 
That got her nowhere; one more gradual, 
Sideways, that would have run her on the stove 
In time, had she not realized her danger 
And caught herself up bodily, chair and all, 

20 s 



And set herself back where she started from. 
'She ain't spick too much Henglishdat's too bad/ 

I was afraid, in brightening first on me, 
Then on Baptiste, as if she understood 
What passed between us, she was only feigning. 
Baptiste was anxious for her; but no more 
Than for himself, so placed he couldn't hope 
To keep his bargain of the morning with me 
In time to keep me from suspecting him 
Of really never having meant to keep it. 

Needlessly soon he had his axe-helves out, 
A quiverful to choose from, since he wished me 
To have the best he had, or had to spare- 
Not for me to ask which, when what he took 
Had beauties he had to point me out at length 
To insure their not being wasted on me. 
He liked to have it slender as a whipstock, 
Free from the least knot, equal to the strain 
Of bending like a sword across the knee. 
He showed me that the lines of a good helve 
Were native to the grain before the knife 
Expressed them, and its curves were no false curves 
Put on it from without. And there its strength lay 
For the hard work. He chafed its long white body 
From end to end with his rough hand shut round it. 
He tried it at the eye-hole in the axe -head. 
'Hahn, hahn/ he mused, 'don't need much taking 
down/ 

206 



Baptiste knew how to make a short job long 
For love of it, and yet not waste time either. 

Do you know, what we talked about was knowledge? 

Baptiste on his defence about the children 

He kept from school, or did his best to keep 

Whatever school and children and our doubts 

Of laid-on education had to do 

With the curves of his axe-helves and his having 

Used these unscrupulously to bring me 

To see for once the inside of his house. 

Was I desired in friendship, partly as some one 

To leave it to, whether the right to hold 

Such doubts of education should depend 

Upon the education of those who held them? 

But now he brushed the shavings from his knee 
And stood the axe there on its horse's hoof, 
Erect, but not without its waves, as when 
The snake stood up for evil in the Garden, 
Top-heavy with a heaviness his short, 
Thick hand made light of, steel-blue chin drawn down 
And in a little a French touch in that. 
Baptiste drew back and squinted at it, pleased; 
'See how she's cock her head!' 



20? 



THE GRINDSTONE 

rlaving a wheel and four legs of its own 
Has never availed the cumbersome grindstone 
To get it anywhere that I can see. 
These hands have helped it go, and even race; 
Not all the motion, though, they ever lent, 
Not all the miles it may have thought it went, 
Have got it one step from the starting place. 
It stands beside the same old apple tree. 
The shadow of the apple tree is thin 
Upon it now, its feet are fast in snow. 
All other farm machinery's gone in, 
And some of it on no more legs and wheel 
Than the grindstone can boast to stand or go, 
(I'm thinking chiefly of the wheelbarrow.) 
For months it hasn't known the taste of steel, 
Washed down with rusty water in a tin. 
But standing outdoors hungry, in the cold, 
Except in towns at night, is not a sin. 
And, anyway, its standing in the yard 
Under a ruinous live apple tree 
Has nothing any more to do with me, 
Except that I remember how of old 
One summer day. all day I drove it hard, 
And someone mounted on it rode it hard, 
And he and I between us ground a blade. 

1 gave it the preliminary spin, 

And poured on water (tears it might have been); 

2O? 



And when it almost gayly jumped and flowed, 

A Father-Time-like man got on and rode, 

Armed with a scythe and spectacles that glowed. 

He turned on will-power to increase the load 

And slow me down and I abruptly slowed, 

Like coming to a sudden railroad station. 

I changed from hand to hand in desperation. 

I wondered what machine of ages gone 

This represented an improvement on. 

For all I knew it may have sharpened spears 

And arrowheads itself. Much use for years 

Had gradually worn it an oblate 

Spheroid that kicked and struggled in its gait, 

Appearing to return me hate for hate; 

(But I forgive it now as easily 

As any other boyhood enemy 

Whose pride has failed to get him anywhere). 

I wondered who it was the man thought ground 

The one who held the wheel back or the one 

Who gave his life to keep it going round? 

I wondered if he really thought it fair 

For him to have the say when we were done. 

Such were the bitter thoughts to which I turned. 

Not for myself was I so much concerned. 

Oh no! -although, of course, I could have found 

A better way to pass the afternoon 

Than grinding discord out of a grindstone, 

And beating insects at their gritty tune. 

Nor was I for the man so much concerned. 

209 



Once when the grindstone almost jumped its bearing 

It looked as if he might be badly thrown 

And wounded on his blade. So far from caring, 

I laughed inside, and only cranked the faster, 

(It ran as if it wasn't greased but glued); 

I'd welcome any moderate disaster 

That might be calculated to postpone 

What evidently nothing could conclude. 

The thing that made me more and more afraid 

Was that we'd ground it sharp and hadn't known. 

And now were only wasting precious blade. 

And when he raised it dripping once and tried 

The creepy edge of it with wary touch, 

And viewed it over his glasses funny-eyed, 

Only disinterestedly to decide 

It needed a turn more, I could have cried 

Wasn't there danger of a turn too much? 

Mightn't we make it worse instead of better? 

I was for leaving something to the whetter. 

What if it wasn't all it should be? I'd 

Be satisfied if he'd be satisfied. 



210 



CAUL'S WIFE 

1 o drive Paul out of any lumber camp 
All that was needed was to say to him, 
'How is the wife, Paul?' and he'd disappear. 
Some said it was because he had no wife, 
And hated to be twitted on the subject. 
Others because he'd come within a day 
Or so of having one, and then been jilted. 
Others because he'd had one once, a good one, 
Who'd run away with some one else and left him. 
And others still because he had one now 
He only had to be reminded of, 
He was all duty to her in a minute: 
He had to run right off to look her up, 
As if to say, 'That's so, how is my wife? 
I hope she isn't getting into mischief.' 
No one was anxious to get rid of Paul. 
He'd been the hero of the mountain camps 
Ever since, just to show them, he had slipped 
The bark of a whole tamarack off whole, 
As clean as boys do off a willow twig 
To make a willow whistle on a Sunday 
In April by subsiding meadow brooks. 
They seemed to ask him just to see him go, 
'How is the wife, Paul?' and he always went. 
He never stopped to murder anyone 
Who asked the question. He just disappeared- 
Nobody knew in what direction, 
Although it wasn't usually long 

211 



Before they heard of him in some new camp, 
The same Paul at the same old feats of logging. 
The question everywhere was why should Paul 
Object to being asked a civil question 
A man you could say almost anything to 
Short of a fighting word. You have the answers. 
And there was one more not so fair to Paul: 
That Paul had married a wife not his equal. 
Paul was ashamed of her. To match a hero, 
She would have had to be a heroine; 
Instead of which she was some half-breed squaw. 
But if the story Murphy told was true, 
She wasn't anything to be ashamed of. 

You know Paul could do wonders. Everyone's 
Heard how he thrashed the horses on a load 
That wouldn't budge until they simply stretched 
Their rawhide harness from the load to camp. 
Paul told the boss the load would be all right, 
'The sun will bring your load in'and it did 
By shrinking the rawhide to natural length. 
That's what is called a stretcher. But I guess 
The one about his jumping so's to land 
With both his feet at once against the Ceiling, 
And then land safely right side up again, 
Back on the floor, is fact or pretty near fact. 
Well this is such a yarn. Paul sawed his wife 
Out of a white-pine log. Murphy was there, 
And, as you might say, saw the lady born. 
Paul worked at anything in lumbering. 

212 



He'd been hard at it taking boards away 

For I forgetthe last ambitious sawyer 

To want to find out if he couldn't pile 

The lumber on Paul till Paul begged for mercy 

They'd sliced the first slab off a big butt log, 

And the sawyer had slammed the carriage back 

To slam end on again against the saw teeth. 

To judge them by the way they caught themselves 

When they saw what had happened to the log, 

They must have had a guilty expectation 

Something was going to go with their slambanging. 

Something had left a broad black streak of grease 

On the new wood the whole length of the log 

Except, perhaps, a foot at either end. 

But when Paul put his finger in the grease, 

It wasn't grease at all, but a long slot. 

The log was hollow. They were sawing pine. 

( First time I ever saw a hollow pine. 

That comes of having Paul around the place. 

Take it to hell for me,' the sawyer said. 

Everyone had to have a look at it, 

And tell Paul what he ought to do about it. 

(They treated it as his.) 'You take a jack-knife, 

And spread the opening, and you've got a dug-out 

All dug to go a-fishing in.' To Paul 

The hollow looked too sound and clean and empty 

Ever to have housed birds or beasts or bees. 

There was no entrance for them to get in by. 

It looked to him like some new kind of hollow 

He thought he'd better take his jack-knife to. 

213 



So after work that evening he came back 

And let enough light into it by cutting 

To see if it was empty. He made out in there 

A slender length of pith, or was it pith? 

It might have been the skin a snake had cast 

And left stood up on end inside the tree 

The hundred years the tree must have been growing 

More cutting and he had this in both hands, 

And, looking from it to the pond near by, 

Paul wondered how it would respond to water. 

Not a breeze stirred, but just the breath of air 

He made in walking slowly to the beach 

Blew it once off his hands and almost broke it. 

He laid it at the edge where it could drink. 

At the first drink it rustled and grew limp. 

At the next drink it grew invisible. 

Paul dragged the shallows for it with his fingers, 

And thought it must have melted. It was gone. 

And then beyond the open water, dim with midges, 

Where the log drive lay pressed against the boom, 

It slowly rose a person, rose a girl, 

Her wet hair heavy on her like a helmet, 

Who, leaning on a log looked back at Paul. 

And that made Paul in turn look back 

To see if it was anyone behind him 

That she was looking at instead of him. 

Murphy had been there watching all the time, 

But from a shed where neither of them could sec him 

There was a moment of suspense in birth 

When the girl seemed too water-logged to live, 

Before she caught her first breath with a gasp 

214 



And laughed. Then she climbed slowly to her feet, 
And walked off talking to herself or Paul 
Across the logs like backs of alligators, 
Paul taking after her around the pond. 

Next evening Murphy and some other fellows 

Got drunk, and tracked the pair up Catamount, 

From the bare top of which there is a view 

To other hills across a kettle valley. 

And there, well after dark, let Murphy tell it, 

They saw Paul and his creature keeping house. 

It was the only glimpse that anyone 

Has had of Paul and her since Murphy saw them 

Falling in love across the twilight mill-pond. 

More than a mile across the wilderness 

They sat together half-way up a cliff 

In a small niche let into it, the girl 

Brightly, as if a star played on the place, 

Paul darkly, like her shadow. All the light 

Was from the girl herself, though, not from a star, 

As was apparent from what happened next. 

All those great ruffians put their throats together, 

And let out a loud yell, and threw a bottle, 

As a brute tribute of respect to beauty. 

Of course the bottle fell short by a mile, 

But the shout reached the girl and put her light out, 

She went out like a firefly, and that was all. 

So there were witnesses that Paul was married, 
And not to anyone to be ashamed of. 
Everyone had been wrong in judging Paul. 

215 



Murphy told me Paul put on all those airs 
About his wife to keep her to himself. 
Paul was what's called a terrible possessor. 
Owning a wife with him meant owning her. 
She wasn't anybody else's business, 
Either to praise her, or so much as name her, 
And he'd thank people not to think of her. 
Murphy's idea was that a man like Paul 
Wouldn't be spoken to about a wife 
[n any way the world knew how to speak. 



216 



WILD GRAPES 

What tree may not the fig be gathered from? 
The grape may not be gathered from the birch? 
It's all you know the grape, or know the birch. 
As a girl gathered from the birch myself 
Equally with my weight in grapes, one autumn, 
I ought to know what tree the grape is fruit of. 
I \vas born, I suppose, like anyone, 
And grew to be a little boyish girl 
My brother could not always leave at home. 
But that beginning was wiped out in fear 
The day I swung suspended with the grapes, 
And was come after like Eurydice 
And brought down safely from the upper regions; 
And the life I live now's an extra life 
I can waste as I please on whom I please. 
So if you see me celebrate two birthdays, 
And give myself out as two different ages, 
One of them five years younger than I look- 
One day my brother led me to a glade 
Where a white birch he knew of stood alone, 
Wearing a thin head-dress of pointed leaves, 
And heavy on her heavy hair behind, 
Against her neck, an ornament of grapes. 
Grapes, I knew grapes from having seen them last 

year. 
One bunch of them, and there began to be 



Bunches all round me growing in white birches, 

The way they grew round Lief the Lucky's German; 

Mostly as much beyond my lifted hands, though, 

As the moon used to seem when I was younger, 

And only freely to be had for climbing. 

My brother did the climbing; and at first 

Threw me down grapes to miss and scatter 

And have to hunt for in sweet fern and hardhack; 

Which gave him some time to himself to eat, 

But not so much, perhaps, as a boy needed. 

So then, to make me wholly self-supporting, 

He climbed still higher and bent the tree to earth, 

And put it in my hands to pick my own grapes. 

'Here, take a tree-top, I'll get down another. 

Hold on with all your might when I let go.' 

I said I had the tree. It wasn't true. 

The opposite was true. The tree had me. 

The minute it was left with me alone 

It caught me up as if I were the fish 

And it the fishpole. So I was translated 

To loud cries from my brother of 'Let go! 

Don't you know anything, you girl? Let go!' 

But I, with something of the baby grip 

Acquired ancestrally in just such trees 

When wilder mothers than our wildest now 

Hung babies out on branches by the hands 

To dry or wash or tan, I don't know which 

(You'll have to ask an evolutionist) 

I held on uncomplainingly for life. 

My brother tried to make me laugh to help me. 

218 



< What are you doing up there in those grapes? 
Don't be afraid. A few of them won't hurt you. 
I mean, they won't pick you if you don't them/ 
Much danger of my picking anything! 
By that time I was pretty well reduced 
To a philosophy of hang-and-let-hang. 
'Now you know how it feels/ my brother said, 
* To be a bunch of fox-grapes, as they call them, 
That when it thinks it has escaped the fox 
By growing where it shouldn't on a birch, 
Where a fox wouldn't think to look for it 
And if he looked and found it, couldn't reach it- 
Just then come you and I to gather it. 
Only you have the advantage of the grapes 
In one way: you have one more stem to cling by, 
And promise more resistance to the picker/ 

One by one I lost off my hat and shoes, 

And still I clung. I let my head fall back, 

And shut my eyes against the sun, my ears 

Against my brother's nonsense; 'Drop/ he said, 

Til catch you in my arms. It isn't far/ 

(Stated in lengths of him it might not be. ) 

'Drop or I'll shake the tree and shake you down/ 

Grim silence on my part as I sank lower, 

My small wrists stretching till they showed the ban* 

jo strings. 

'Why, if she isn't serious about it! 
Hold tight awhile till I think what to do. 
I'll bend the tree down and let you down by it/ 

219 



[ don't know much about the letting down; 
But once I felt ground with my stocking feet 
And the world came revolving back to me, 
I know I looked long at my curled-up fingers. 
Before I straightened them and brushed the bark off. 
My brother said: 'Don't you weigh anything? 
Try to weigh something next time., so you won't 
Be run oft with by birch trees into space/ 

It wasn't my not weighing anything 
So much as my not knowing anything 
My brother had been nearer right before. 
I had not taken the first step in knowledge; 
I had not learned to let go with the hands, 
As still I have not learned to with the heart, 
And have no wish to with the heartnor need, 
That I can see. The mind is not the heart. 
I may yet live, as I know others live, 
To wish in vain to let go with the mind 
Of cares, at night, to sleep; but nothing tells me 
That I need learn to let go with the heart. 



220 



THE WITCH OF COOS 

I staid the night for shelter at a farm 
Behind the mountain, with a mother and son, 
Two old-believers. They did all the talking. 

MOTHER. Folks think a witch who has familiar 

spirits 

She could call up to pass a winter evening, 
But won't, should be burned at the stake or some^ 

thing. 

Summoning spirits isn't 'Button, button, 
Who's got the button/ 1 would have them know. 

SON. Mother can make a common table rear 
And kick with two legs like an army mule. 

MOTHER. And when I've done it, what good have 

I done? 

Rather than tip a table for you, let me 
Tell you what Ralle the Sioux Control once told me, 
He said the dead had souls, but when I asked him 
How could that be I thought the dead were souls, 
He broke my trance. Don't that make you suspicious 
That there's something the dead are keeping back? 
Yes, there's something the dead are keeping back. 

SON. You wouldn't want to tell him what we have 
Up attic, mother? 

221 



MOTHER. Bones a skeleton. 

SON. But the headboard of mother's bed is pushed 

Against the attic door: the door is nailed. 

It's harmless, Mother hears it in the night 

Halting perplexed behind the barrier 

Of door and headboard. Where it wants to get 

Is back into the cellar where it came from. 

MOTHER. We'll never let them, will we, son! We'll 
never! 

SON. It left the cellar forty years ago 

And carried itself like a pile of dishes 

Up one flight from the cellar to the kitchen, 

Another from the kitchen to the bedroom, 

Another from the bedroom to the attic, 

Right past both father and mother, and neither 

stopped it. 

Father had gone upstairs; mother was downstairs. 
I was a baby: I don't know where I was. 

MOTHER. The only fault my husband found withme 

I went to sleep before I went to bed, 

Especially in winter when the bed 

Might just as well be ice and the clothes snow. 

The night the bones came up the cellar-stairs 

Toffile had gone to bed alone and left me, 

But left an open door to cool the room off 

So as to sort of turn me out of it. 

222 



I was just coming to myself enough 

To wonder where the cold was coming from, 

When I heard Toffile upstairs in the bedroom 

And thought I heard him downstairs in the cellar. 

The board we had laid down to walk dry-shod on 

When there was water in the cellar in spring 

Struck the hard cellar bottom. And then someone 

Began the stairs, two footsteps for each step, 

The way a man with one leg and a crutch, 

Or a little child, comes up. It wasn't Toffile: 

It wasn't anyone who could be there. 

The bulkhead double-doors were double-locked 

And swollen tight and buried under snow. 

The cellar windows were banked up with sawdust 

And swollen tight and buried under snow. 

It was the bones. I knew them and good reason. 

My first impulse was to get to the knob 

And hold the door. But the bones didn't try 

The door; they halted helpless on the landing, 

Waiting for things to happen in their favor. 

The faintest restless rustling ran all through them. 

I never could have done the thing I did 

If the wish hadn't been too strong in me 

To see how they were mounted for this walk. 

I had a vision of them put together 

Not like a man, but like a chandelier. 

So suddenly I flung the door wide on him. 

A moment he stood balancing with emotion, 

And all but lost himself. (A tongue of fire 

223 



Flashed out and licked along his upper teeth. 

Smoke rolled inside the sockets of his eyes.) 

Then he came at me with one hand outstretched, 

The way he did in life once; but this time 

I struck the hand off brittle on the floor, 

And fell back from him on the floor myself. 

The finger-pieces slid in all directions. 

(Where did I see one of those pieces lately^ 

Hand me my button-boxit must be thei c. ) 

I sat up on the floor and shouted, 'Toffil* 1 , 

It's coming up to you.' It had its choice 

Of the door to the cellar or the hall. 

It took the hall door for the novelty, 

And set off briskly for so slow a thing, 

Still going every which way in the joints, though, 

So that it looked like lightning or a scribble, 

From the slap I had just now given its hand. 

I listened till it almost climbed the stairs 

From the hall to the only finished bedroom, 

Before I got up to do anything; 

Then ran and shouted, 'Shut the bedroom door, 

Toffile, for my sake!' ( Company?' he said, 

* Don't make me get up; Pm too warm in bed/ 

So lying forward weakly on the handrail 

I pushed myself upstairs, and in the light 

(The kitchen had been dark) I had to own 

I could see nothing. 'Toffile, I don't see it. 

It's with us in the room though. It's the bones/ 

*What bones?' 'The cellar bones out of the grave/ 

224 



That made him throw his bare legs out of bed 

And sit up by me and take hold of me. 

I wanted to put out the light and see 

If I could see it, or else mow the room, 

With our arms at the level of our knees, 

And bring the chalk-pile down. Til tell you what 

It's looking for another door to try. 

The uncommonly deep snow has made him think 

Of his old song, The Wild Colonial Boy, 

He always used to sing along the tote-road. 

He's after an open door to get out-doors. 

Let's trap him with an open door up attic/ 

Toffile agreed to that, and sure enough, 

Almost the moment he was given an opening, 

The steps began to climb the attic stairs. 

I heard them. Toffile didn't seem to hear them. 

'Quick!' I slammed to the door and held the knob, 

'Toffile, get nails/ I made him nail the door shut 

And push the headboard of the bed against it. 

Then we asked was there anything 

Up attic that we'd ever want again. 

The attic was less to us than the cellar. 

If the bones liked the attic, let them have it. 

Let them stay in the attic. When they sometimes 

Come down the stairs at night and stand perplexed 

Behind the door and headboard of the bed, 

Brushing their chalky skull with chalky fingers, 

With sounds like the dry rattling of a shutter, 

That's what I sit up in the dark to say 

225 



To no one any more since Toffile died. 

Let them stay in the attic since they went there. 

I promised Toffile to be cruel to them 

For helping them be cruel once to him. 

SON. We think they had a grave down in the cellar. 

MOTHER. We know they had a grave down in the 
cellar. 

SON. We never could find out whose bones they 
were. 

MOTHER. Yes, we could too, son. Tell the truth for 

once 

They were a man's his father killed for me. 
I mean a man he killed instead of me. 
The least I could do was to help dig their grave. 
We were about it one night in the cellar. 
Son knows the story: but 'twas not for him 
To tell the truth, suppose the time had come. 
Son looks surprised to see me end a lie 
We'd kept all these years between ourselves 
So as to have it ready for outsiders. 
But tonight I don't care enough to lie 
I don't remember why I ever cared. 
Toffile, if he were here, I don't believe 
Could tell you why he ever cared himself. . . 



226 



She hadn't found the finger-bone she wanted 
Among the buttons poured out in her lap. 
I verified the name next morning: Toffile. 
The rural letter-box said Toffile Lajway. 



227 



AN EMPTY THREAT 

I stay; 

But it isn't as if 

There wasn't always Hudson's Bay 

And the fur trade, 

A small skiff 

And a paddle blade. 

I can just see my tent pegged, 

And me on the floor, 

Crosslegged, 

And a trapper looking in at the door 

With furs to sell. 

His name's Joe, 

Alias John, 

And between what he doesn't know 

And won't tell 

About where Henry Hudson's gone, 

I can't say he's much help; 

But we get on. 

The seal yelp 

On an ice cake. 

It's not men by some mistake? 

No, 

There's not a soul 

128 



l<or a wind- break 

Between me and the North Pole 

Except always John- Joe, 
My French Indian Esquimaux. 
And he's off setting traps, 
In one himself perhaps. 

Give a head shake 

Over so much bay 

Thrown away 

In snow and mist 

That doesn't exist, 

I was going to say, 

For God, man or beast's sake. 

Yet does perhaps for all three. 

Don't ask Joe 

What it is to him. 

It's sometimes dim 

\Vhat it is to me, 

Unless it be 

It's the old captain's dark fate 

Who failed to find or force a strait 

In its two-thousand-mile coast; 

And his crew left him where he failed, 

And nothing came of all he sailed. 

It's to say, 'You and F 
To such a ghost, 



229 



''You and I 

Off here 

With the dead race of the Greak Auk!' 

And, 'Better defeat almost, 

If seen clear, 

Than life's victories of doubt 

That need endless talk talk 

To make them out.' 



230 



FRAGMENTARY BLUE 

Why make so much of fragmentary blue 
In here and there a bird, or butterfly, 
Or flower, or wearing-stone, or open eye, 
When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue? 

Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet) 
Though some savants make earth include the sky; 
And blue so far above us comes so high, 
It only gives our wish for blue a whet. 



231 



FIRE AND ICE 



say the world "will end in fire, 
Some say in ice. 
From what I've tasted of desire 
I hold with those who favor fire. 
But if it had to perish twice, 
I think I know enough of hate 
To say that for destruction ice 
fs also great 
And would suffice. 



232 



DUST OF SNOW 

Ihe way a crow 
Shook down on me 
The dust of snow 
From a hemlock tree 

Has given my heart 
A change of mood 
And saved some part 
Of a day I had rued. 



233 



TO E. T. 

1 slumbered with your poems on my breast 
Spread open as I dropped them half-read through 
Like dove wings on a figure on a tomb 
To see, if in a dream they brought of you, 

I might not have the chance I missed in life 
Through some delay, and call you to your face 
First soldier, and then poet, and then both, 
Who died a soldier-poet of your race. 

1 meant, you meant, that nothing should remain 
Unsaid between us, brother, and this remained 
And one thing more that was not then to say: 
The Victory for what it lost and gained. 

You went to meet the shell's embrace of fire 
On Vimy Ridge; and when you fell that day 
The war seemed over more for you than me, 
But now for me than youthe other way. 

How over, though, for even me who knew 

The foe thrust back unsafe beyond the Rhine, 

If I was not to speak of it to you 

And see you pleased once more with words of mine? 



234 



NOTHING GOLD CAN STAY 

INature's first green is gold, 
Her hardest hue to hold. 
Her early leaf's a flower; 
But only so an hour. 
Then leaf subsides to leaf. 
So Eden sank to grief, 
So dawn goes down to day. 
Nothing gold can stay. 



235 



THE RUNAWAY 

Once when the snow of the year was beginning to 

fall, 
We stopped by a mountain pasture to say, ' Whose 

colt?' 

A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall, 
The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head 
And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt. 
We heard the miniature thunder where he fled, 
And we saw him, or thought we saw him, dim and 



Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes. 
*I think the little fellow's afraid of the snow. 
He isn't winter-broken. It isn't play 
With the little fellow at all. He's running away. 
I doubt if even his mother could tell him, "Sakes, 
It's only weather/' He'd think she didn't know! 
Where is his mother? He can't be out alone.' 
And now he comes again with clatter of stone, 
And mounts the wall again with whited eyes 
And all his tail that isn't hair up straight. 
He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies. 
'Whoever it is that leaves him out so late, 
When other creatures have gone to stall and bin, 
Ought to be told to come and take him in.' 



236 



THE AIM WAS SONG 

13efore man came to blow it right 

The wind once blew itself untaught, 

And did its loudest day and night 
In any rough place where it caught. 

Man came to tell it what was wrong: 
It hadn't fouijd the place to blow; 

It blew too hardthe aim was song. 
And listen how it ought to go! 

He took a little in his mouth, 

And held it long enough for north 

To be converted into south, 

And then by measure blew it forth. 

By measure. It was word and note, 
The wind the wind had meant to be 
A little through the lips and throat. 
The aim was song the wind could see. 



237 



STOPPING BY WOODS ON A SNOWY 

EVENING 

Whose woods these are I think I know 
His house is in the village though; 
He will not see me stopping here 
To watch his woods fill up with snow. 

My little horse must think it queer 
To stop without a farmhouse near 
Between the woods and frozen lake 
The darkest evening of the year. 

He gives his harness bells a shake 
To ask if there is some mistake. 
The only other sound's the sweep 
Of easy wind and downy flake. 

The woods are lovely, dark and deep. 
But I have promises to keep, 
And miles to go before I sleep, 
And miles to go before I sleep. 



238 



FOR ONCE, THEN, SOMETHING 

vJthers taunt me with having knelt at well-curbs 
Always wrong to the light, so never seeing 
Deeper down in the well than where the water 
Gives me back in a shining surface picture 
Me myself in the summer heaven godlike 
Looking out of a wreath of fern and cloud puffs. 
Once, when trying with chin against a well-curb, 
I discerned, as I thought, beyond the picture, 
Through the picture, a something white, uncertain, 
Something more of the depths and then I lost it. 
Water came to rebuke the too clear water. 
One drop fell from a fern, and lo, a ripple 
Shook whatever it was lay there at bottom, 
Blurred it, blotted it out. What was that whiteness? 
Truth? A pebble of quartz? For once, then, some- 
thing. 



239 



6LUE-BUTTERFLY DAY 

It is blue-butterfly day here in spring. 

And with these sky-flakes down in flurry on flurry 

There is more unmixed color on the wing 

Than flowers will show for days unless they hurry. 

But these are flowers that fly and all but sing: 
And now from having ridden out desire 
They lie closed over in the wind and cling 
Where wheels have freshly sliced the April mire. 



240 



THE ONSET 

Always the same, when on a fated night 
At last the gathered snow lets down as white 
As may be in dark woods, and with a song 
It shall not make again all winter long 
Of hissing on the yet uncovered ground, 
I almost stumble looking up and round, 
As one who overtaken by the end 
Gives up his errand, and lets death descend 
Upon him where he is, with nothing done 
To evil, no important triumph won, 
More than if life had never been begun. 

Yet all the precedent is on my side: 

I know that winter death has never tried 

The earth but it has failed: the snow may heap 

In long storms an undrifted four feet deep 

As measured against maple, birch and oak, 

It cannot check the peeper's silver croak; 

And I shall see the snow all go down hill 

In water of a slender April rill 

That flashes tail through last year's withered brake 

And dead weeds, like a disappearing snake. 

Nothing will be left white but here a birch, 

And there a clump of houses with a church. 



241 



TO EARTHWARD 

Love at the lips was touch 
As sweet as I could bear; 
And once that seemed too much; 
I lived on air 

That crossed me from sweet things, 
The flow of was it musk 
From hidden grapevine springs 
Down hill at dusk? 

I had the swirl and ache 
From sprays of honeysuckle 
That when they're gathered shake 
Dew on the knuckle. 

I craved strong sweets, but those 
Seemed strong when I was young; 
The petal of the rose 
It was that stung. 

Now no joy but lacks salt 
That is not dashed with pain 
And weariness and fault; 
I crave the stain 

Of tears, the aftermark 
Of almost too much love, 

242 



The sweet of bitter bark 
And burning clove. 

When stiff and sore and scarred 
I take away my hand 
From leaning on it hard 
In grass and sand ; 

The hurt is not enough: 
I long for weight and strength 
To feel the earth as rough 
To all my length. 



GOOD-BYE AND KEEP COLD 

JThis saying good-bye on the edge of the dark 
And the cold to an orchard so young in the bark 
Reminds me of all that can happen to harm 
An orchard away at the end of the farm 
All winter, cut off by a hill from the house. 
[ don't want it girdled by rabbit and mouse, 
[ don't want it dreamily nibbled for browse 
By deer, and I don't want it budded by grouse. 
(If certain it wouldn't be idle to call 
I'd summon grouse, rabbit, and deer to the wall 
And warn them away with a stick for a gun.) 
I don't want it stirred by the heat of the sun, 
(We made it secure against being, I hope^ 
By setting it out on a northerly slope.) 
No orchard's the worse for the wintriest storm; 
But one thing about it ; it mustn't get warm. 
'How often already you've had to be told, 
Keep cold, young orchard. Good-bye and keep cold, 
Dread fifty above more than fifty below.' 
I have to be gone for a season or so. 
My business a while is with different trees, 
Less carefully nurtured, less fruitful than these, 
And such as is done to their wood with an axe-- 
Maples and birches and tamaracks. 
I wish I could promise to lie in the night 
And think of an orchard's arboreal plight 

244 



When slowly (and nobody comes with a light) 
Its heart sinks lower under the sod. 
But something has to be left to God. 



245 



TWO LOOK AT TWO 

JLove and forgetting might have carried them 

A little further up the mountain side 

With night so near, but not much further up. 

They must have halted soon in any case 

With thoughts of the path back, how rough it was 

With rock and washout, and unsafe in darkness; 

When they were halted by a tumbled wall 

With barbed-wire binding. They stood facing this,, 

Spending what onward impulse they still had 

In one last look the way they must not go, 

On up the failing path, where, if a stone 

Or earthslide moved at night, it moved itself; 

No footstep moved it. 'This is all/ they sighed, 

'Good-night to woods.' But not so; there was more. 

A doe from round a spruce stood looking at them 

Across the wall, as near the wall as they. 

She saw them in their field, they her in hers. 

The difficulty of seeing what stood still, 

Like some up-ended boulder split in two, 

Was in her clouded eyes: they saw no fear there. 

She seemed to think that two thus they were safe. 

Then, as if they were something that, though strange, 

She could not trouble her mind with too long, 

She sighed and passed unscared along the wall. 

'This, then, is all. What more is there to ask?' 

But no, not yet. A snort to bid them wait. 

A buck from round the spruce stood looking at them 

246 



Across the wall as near the wall as they. 

This was an antlered buck of lusty nostril, 

Not the same doe come back into her place. 

He viewed them quizzically with jerks of head, 

As if to ask, 'Why don't you make some motion? 

Or give some sign of life? Because you can't. 

I doubt if you're as living as you look/ 

Thus till he had them almost feeling dared 

To stretch a proffering hand and a spell-breaking. 

Then he too passed unscared along the wall. 

Two had seen two, whichever side you spoke from. 

'This must be all/ It was all. Still they stood, 

A great wave from it going over them, 

As if the earth in one unlooked-for favor 

Had made them certain earth returned their love. 



247 



NOT TO KEEP 

Ihey sent him back to her. The letter came 
Saying . . . And she could have him. And before 
She could be sure there was no hidden ill 
Under the formal writing^ he was in her sight, 
Living. They gave him back to her alive- 
How else? They are not known to send the dead- 
And not disfigured visibly. His face? 
His hands? She had to look, to ask, 
' What is it, dear?' And she had given all 
And still she had all they had they the lucky! 
Wasn't she glad now? Everything seemed won, 
And all the rest for them permissible ease. 
She had to ask, ' What was it, dear?' 

* Enough, 

Yet not enough. A bullet through and through, 
High in the breast. Nothing but what good care 
And medicine and rest, and you a week, 
Can cure me of to go again. 7 The same 
Grim giving to do over for them both. 
She dared no more than ask him with her eyes 
How was it with him for a second trial. 
And with his eyes he asked her not to ask. 
They had given him back to her, but not to keep. 



A BROOK IN THE CITY 

Ihe farm house lingers, though averse to square 
With the new city street it has to wear 
A number in. But what about the brook 
That held the house as in an elbow-crook? 
I ask as one who knew the brook, its strength 
And impulse, having dipped a finger length 
And made it leap my knuckle, having tossed 
A flower to try its currents where they crossed. 
The meadow grass could be cemented down 
From growing under pavements of a town; 
The apple trees be sent to hearth-stone flame. 
Is water wood to serve a brook the same? 
How else dispose of an immortal force 
No longer needed? Staunch it at its source 
With cinder loads dumped down? The brook was 

thrown 

Deep in a sewer dungeon under stone 
In fetid darkness still to live and run 
And all fo^ nothing it had ever done 
Except forget to go in fear perhaps. 
No one would know except for ancient maps 
That such a brook ran water. But I wonder 
If from its being kept forever under 
The thoughts may not have risen that so keep 
This new-built city from both work and sleep. 



249 



THE KITCHEN CHIMNEY 

Builder, in building the little house, 
In every way you may please yourself; 
But please please me in the kitchen chimney: 
Don't build me a chimney upon a shelf. 

However far you must go for bricks, 
Whatever they cost a-piece or a pound, 
Buy me enough for a full-length chimney, 

build the chimney clear from the ground. 



It's not that Fm greatly afraid of fire, 
But I never heard of a house that throve 
(And I know of one that didn't thrive) 
Where the chimney started above the stove. 

And I dread the ominous stain of tar 

That there always is on the papered walls, 

And the smell of fire drowned in rain 

That there always is when the chimney's false. 

A shelf's for a clock or vase or picture, 
But I don't see why it should have to bear 
A chimney that only would serve to remind me 
Of castles I used to build in air. 



250 



LOOKING FOR A SUNSET BIRD IN 
WINTER 

Ihe west was getting out of gold, 
The breath of air had died of cold, 
When shoeing home across the white, 
I thought I saw a bird alight. 

In summer when I passed the place 
I had to stop and lift my face; 
A bird with an angelic gift 
Was singing in it sweet and swift. 

No bird was singing in it now. 
A single leaf was on a bough, 
And that was all there was to see 
In going twice around the tree. 

From my advantage on a hill 
I judged that such a crystal chill 
Was only adding frost to snow 
As gilt to gold that wouldn't show. 

A brush had left a crooked stroke 
Of what was either cloud or smoke 
From north to south across the blue; 
A piercing little star was through. 



251 



GATHERING LEAVES 

opades take up leaves 
No better than spoons, 
And bags full of leaves 
Are light as balloons. 

I make a great noise 
Of rustling all day 
Like rabbit and deer 
Running away. 

But the mountains I raise 
Elude my embrace. 
Flowing over my arms 
And into my face. 

I may load and unload 
Again and again 
Till I fill the whole shed, 
And what have I then? 

Next to nothing for weight; 
And since they grew duller 
From contact with earth, 
Next to nothing for color. 



252 



Next to nothing for use. 
But a crop is a crop, 
And who's to say where 
The harvest shall stop? 



253 



MISGIVING 

All crying 'We will go with you, O Wind!' 
The foliage follow him, leaf and stem; 
But a sleep oppresses them as they go, 
And they end by bidding him stay with them. 

Since ever they flung abroad in spring 
The leaves had promised themselves this flight, 
Who now would fain seek sheltering wall, 
Or thicket, or hollow place for the night. 

And now they answer his summoning blast 

With an ever vaguer and vaguer stir, 

Or at utmost a little reluctant whirl 

That drops them no further than where they were 

I only hope that when I am free 

As they are free to go in quest 

Of the knowledge beyond the bounds of life 

It may not seem better to me to rest. 



254 



PLOWMEN 

A plow, they say., to plow the snow. 
They cannot mean to plant it, though- 
Unless in bitterness to mock 
At having cultivated rock. 



255 



ON A TREE FALLEN ACROSS THE 
ROAD 

(TO HEAR US TALK) 

I he tree the tempest with a crash of wood 
Throws down in front of us is not to bar 
Our passage to our journey's end for good, 
But just to ask us who we think we are 

Insisting always on our own way so. 
She likes to halt us in our runner tracks, 
And make us get down in a foot of snow 
Debating what to do without an axe. 

And yet she knows obstruction is in vain: 

We will not be put off the final goal 

We have it hidden in us to attain, 

Not though we have to seize earth by the pole 

And, tired of aimless circling in one place, 
Steer straight off after something into space. 



256 



OUR SINGING STRENGTH 

It snowed in spring on earth so dry and warm 
The flakes could find no landing place to form. 
Hordes spent themselves to make it wet and cold, 
And still they failed of any lasting hold. 
They made no white impression on the black. 
They disappeared as if earth sent them back. 
Not till from separate flakes they changed at night 
To almost strips and tapes of ragged white 
Did grass and garden ground confess it snowed. 
And all go back to winter but the road. 
Next day the scene was piled and puffed and dead. 
The grass lay flattened under one great tread. 
Borne down until the end almost took root, 
The rangey bough anticipated fruit 
With snowballs cupped in every opening bud. 
The road alone maintained itself in mud, 
Whatever its secret was of greater heat 
From inward fires or brush of passing feet. 

In spring more mortal singers than belong 

To any one place cover us with song. 

Thrush, bluebird, blackbird, sparrow, and robin 

throng; 

Some to go further north to Hudson's Bay, 
Some that have come too far north back away, 
Really a very few to build and stay. 
Now was seen how these liked belated snow. 



The fields had nowhere left for them to go; 

They'd soon exhausted all there was in flying; 

The trees they'd had enough of with once trying 

And setting off their heavy powder load. 

They could find nothing open but the road. 

So there they let their lives be narrowed in 

By thousands the bad weather made akin. 

The road became a channel running flocks 

Of glossy birds like ripples over rocks. 

[ drove them under foot in bits of flight 

That kept the ground, almost disputing right 

Of way with me from apathy of wing, 

A talking twitter all they had to sing. 

A few I must have driven to despair 

Made quick asides, but having done in air 

A whir among white branches great and small 

As in some too much carven marble hall 

Where one false wing beat would have brought 

down all, 

Came tamely back in front of me, the Drover, 
To suffer the same driven nightmare over. 
One such storm in a lifetime couldn't teach them 
That back behind pursuit it couldn't reach them; 
None flew behind me to be left alone. 

Well, something for a snowstorm to have shown 
The country' s singing strength thus brought together, 
That though repressed and moody with the weather 
Was none the less there ready to be freed 
And sing the wildflowers up from root and seed. 

253 



THE NEED OF BEING VERSED IN 
COUNTRY THINGS 

Ihe house had gone to bring again 
To the midnight sky a sunset glow. 
Now the chimney was all of the house that stood, 
Like a pistil after the petals go. 

The barn opposed across the way, 
That would have joined the house in flame 
Had it been the will of the wind, was left 
To bear forsaken the place's name. 

No more it opened with all one end 
For teams that came by the stony road 
To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs 
And brush the mow with the summer load. 

The birds that came to it through the air 
At broken windows flew out and in, 
Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh 
From too much dwelling on what has been. 

Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf, 
And the aged elm, though touched with fire; 
And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm; 
And the fence post carried a strand of wire. 



259 



For them there was really nothing sad. 
But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept, 
One had to be versed in country things 
Not to believe the phoebes wept 



26O 



West-Running Brook 



SPRING POOLS 

Ihese pools that, though in forests, still reflect 
The total sky almost without defect, 
And like the flowers beside them, chill and shiver, 
Will like the flowers beside them soon be gone, 
And yet not out by any brook or river, 
But up by roots to bring dark foliage on. 

The trees that have it in their pent-up buds 
To darken nature and be summer woods- 
Let them think twice before they use their powers 
To blot out and drink up and sweep away 
These flowery waters and these watery flowers 
From snow that melted only yesterday. 



263 



THE FREEDOM OF THE MOON 

I ve tried the new moon tilted in the air 
Above a hazy tree-and-farmhouse cluster 
As you might try a jewel in your hair, 
I've tried it fine with little breadth of lustre, 
Alone, or in one ornament combining 
With one first-water star almost as shining. 

I put it shining anywhere I please. 
By walking slowly on some evening later, 
I've pulled it from a crate of crooked trees, 
And brought it over glossy water, greater, 
And dropped it in, and seen the image wallow, 
The color run, all sorts of wonder follow. 



264 



FIREFLIES IN THE GARDEN 

ilere come real stars to fill the upper skies, 
And here on earth come emulating flies, 
That though they never equal stars in size, 
(And they were never really stars at heart) 
Achieve at times a very star-like start. 
Only, of course, they can't sustain the part. 



365 



ATMOSPHERE 

INSCRIPTION FOR A GARDEN WALL 

XVinds blow the open grassy places bleak; 
But where this old wall burns a sunny cheek, 
They eddy over it too toppling weak 
To blow the earth or anything self-clear; 
Moisture and color and odor thicken here. 
The hours of daylight gather atmosphere. 



266 



DEVOTION 

Ihe heart can think of no devotion 
Greater than being shore to the ocean- 
Holding the curve of one position, 
Counting an endless repetition. 



267 



ON GOING UNNOTICED 

As vain to raise a voice as a sigh 
In the tumult of free leaves on high. 
What are you in the shadow of trees 
Engaged up there with the light and breeze? 

Less than the coral-root you know 
That is content with the daylight low, 
And has no leaves at all of its own; 
Whose spotted flowers hang meanly down 

You grasp the bark by a rugged pleat. 
And look up small from the forest's feet. 
The only leaf it drops goes wide. 
Your name not written on either side. 

You linger your little hour and are gone, 
And still the woods sweep leafily on, 
Not even missing the coral-root flower 
You took as a trophy of the hour. 



268 



A PASSING GLIMPSE 

To Ridgely Torrence 

On Last Looking Into His 'Hesperides* 



1 often see flowers from a passing car 

That are gone before I can tell what they are. 

I want to get out of the train and go back 
To see what they were beside the track. 

I name all the flowers I am sure they weren't: 
Not fireweed loving where woods have burnt- 

Not blue bells gracing a tunnel mouth- 
Not lupine living on sand and drouth. 

Was something brushed across my mind 
That no one on earth will ever find? 

Heaven gives its glimpses only to those 
Not in position to look too close. 



369 



A PECK OF GOLD 

Dust always blowing about the town, 
Except when sea-fog laid it down, 
And I was one of the children told 
Some of the blowing dust was gold. 

All the dust the wind blew high 
Appeared like gold in the sunset sky, 
But I was one of the children told 
Some of the dust was really gold. 

Such was life in the Golden Gate: 
Gold dusted all we drank and ate, 
And I was one of the children told, 
'We all must eat our peck of gold/ 



270 



ACCEPTANCE 

When the spent sun throws up its rays on cloud 
And goes down burning into the gulf below, 
No voice in nature is heard to cry aloud 
At what has happened. Birds, at least, must know 
It is the change to darkness in the sky. 
Murmuring something quiet in her breast, 
One bird begins to close a faded eye; 
Or overtaken too far from his nest, 
Hurrying low above the grove, some waif 
Swoops just in time to his remembered tree. 
At most he thinks or twitters softly, 'Safe! 
Now let the night be dark for all of me. 
Let the night be too dark for me to see 
Into the future. Let what will be, be/ 



271 



ONCE BY THE PACIFIC 

Ihe shattered water made a misty din. 
Great waves looked over others coming in, 
And thought of doing something to the shore 
That water never did to land before. 
The clouds were low and hairy in the skies, 
Like locks blown forward in the gleam of eyes. 
You could not tell, and yet it looked as if 
The shore was lucky in being backed by cliff, 
The cliff in being backed by continent; 
It looked as if a night of dark intent 
Was coming, and not only a night, an age. 
Someone had better be prepared for rage. 
There would be more than ocean-water broken 
Before God's last Put out the Light was spoken. 



272 



LODGED 

Ihe rain to the wind said 
1 You push and I'll pelt/ 
They so smote the garden bed 
That the flowers actually knelt, 
And lay lodged though not dead. 
I know how the flowers felt. 



273 



A MINOR BIRD 

I have wished a bird would fly away, 
And not sing by my house all day; 

Have clapped my hands at him from the door 
When it seemed as if I could bear no more. 

The fault must partly have been in me. 
The bird was not to blame for his key. 

And of course there must be something wrong 
In wanting to silence any song. 



274 



BEREFT 

Where had I heard this wind before 
Change like this to a deeper roar? 
WTiat would it take my standing there for, 
Holding open a restive door, 
Looking down hill to a frothy shore? 
Summer was past and day was past. 
Sombre clouds in the west were massed. 
Out in the porch's sagging floor, 
Leaves got up in a coil and hissed, 
Blindly struck at my knee and missed. 
Something^sinister in the tone 
Told me my secret must be known: 
\Vord I was in the house alone 
Somehow must have gotten abroad, 
"Word I was in my life alone, 
Word I had no one left but God, 



275 



TREE AT MY WINDOW 

Iree at my window, window tree, 
My sash is lowered when night comes on; 
3ut let there never be curtain drawn 
Between you and me. 

Vague dream-head lifted out of the ground, 
And thing next most diffuse to cloud, 
Not all your light tongues talking aloud 
Could be profound. 

But tree, I have seen you taken and tossed, 
And if you have seen me when I slept, 
You have seen me when I was taken and swept 
And all but lost. 

That day she put our heads together, 
Fate had her imagination about her, 
Your head so much concerned with outer, 
Mine with inner, weather. 



276 



THE PEACEFUL SHEPHERD 

If heaven were to do again, 
And on the pasture bars, 
I leaned to line the figures in 
Between the dotted stars, 

I should be tempted to forget, 

I fear, the Crown of Rule, 

The Scales of Trade, the Cross of Faith, 

As hardly worth renewal. 

For these have governed in our lives, 
And see how men have warred. 
The Cross, the Crown, the Scales may all 
As well have been the Sword. 



277 



A WINTER EDEN 

A winter garden in an alder swamp, 

Where conies now come out to sun and romp, 

As near a paradise as it can be 

And not melt snow or start a dormant tree. 

It lifts existence on a plane of snow 
One level higher than the earth below, 
One level nearer heaven overhead, 
And last year's berries shining scarlet red. 

It lifts a gaunt luxuriating beast 
Where he can stretch and hold his highest feast 
On some wild apple tree's young tender bark, 
What well may prove the year's high girdle mark. 

So near to paradise all pairing ends: 
Here loveless birds now flock as winter friends, 
Content with bud-inspecting. They presume 
To say which buds are leaf and which are bloom. 

A feather-hammer gives a double knock. 
This Eden day is done at two o'clock. 
An hour of winter day might seem too short 
To make it worth life's while to wake and sport. 



278 



THE FLOOD 

Blood has been harder to dam back than water. 

Just when we think we have it impounded safe 

Behind new barrier walls (and let it chafe!), 

It breaks away in some new kind of slaughter. 

We choose to say it is let loose by the devil; 

But power of blood itself releases blood. 

It goes by might of being such a flood 

Held high at so unnatural a level. 

It will have outlet, brave and not so brave. 

Weapons of war and implements of peace 

Are but the points at which it finds release. 

And now it is once more the tidal wave 

That when it has swept by leaves summits stained. 

Oh, blood will out. It cannot be contained. 



ACQUAINTED WITH THE NIGHT 

1 have been one acquainted with the night. 
I have "walked out in rain and back in rain. 
I have outwalked the furthest city light. 

I have looked down the saddest city lane. 
I have passed by the watchman on his beat 
And dropped my eyes, unwilling to explain. 

I have stood still and stopped the sound of feet 
When far away an interrupted cry 
Came over houses from another sireet, 

But not to call me back or say good-bye; 
And further still at an unearthly height, 
One luminary clock against the sky 

Proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right 
I have been one acquainted with the night. 



280 



THE LOVELY SHALL BE CHOOSERS 

The Voice said, <Hther<JoM*i!' 
The Voices, c How far down?' 
'Seven levels of the world/ 
'How much time have we?' 

'Take twenty years. 

She would refuse love safe with wealth and honor! 

The lovely shall be choosers, shall they? 

Then let them choose!' 

'Then we shall let her choose?' 

'Yes, let her choose. 

Take up the task beyond her choosing.' 

Invisible hands crowded on her shoulder 

In readiness to weigh upon her. 

But she stood straight still, 

In broad round ear-rings, gold and jet with pearls 

And broad round suchlike brooch, 

Her cheeks high colored, 

Proud and the pride of friends. 

The Voice asked, 'You can let her choose?* 

281 



'Yes, we can let her and still triumph/ 

'Do it by joys, and leave her always blameless. 

Be her first joy her wedding, 

That though a wedding, 

Is yet well something they know, he and she. 

And after that her next joy 

That though she grieves,, her grief is secret: 

Those friends know nothing of her grief to make it 

shameful 
Her third joy that though now they cannot help but 

know, 

They move in pleasure too far off 
To think much or much care. 
Give her a child at either knee for fourth joy 
To tell once and once only, for them never to forget, 
How once she walked in brightness, 
And make them see it in the winter firelight. 
But give her friends for then she dare not tell 
For their foregone incredulousness 
And be her next joy this: 
Her never having deigned to tell them. 
Make her among the humblest even 
Seem to them less than they are. 
Hopeless of being known for what she has been, 
Failing of being loved for what she is, 
Give her the comfort for her sixth of knowing 
She fails from strangeness to a way of life 
She came to from too high too late to learn. 
Then send some one with eyes to see 

282 



CANIS MAJOR 

Ihe great Overdog, 
That heavenly beast 
With a star in one eye, 
Gives a leap in the east. 

He dances upright 
All the way to the west 
And never once drops 
On his forefeet to rest. 

I'm a poor underdog, 
But tonight I will bark 
With the great Overdog 
That romps through the dark. 



289 



A SOLDIER 

Jrle is that fallen lance that lies as hurled, 
That lies unlifted now, come dew, come rust, 
But still lies pointed as it plowed the dust. 
If we who sight along it round the world, 
See nothing worthy to have been its mark, 
It is because like men we look too near, 
Forgetting that as fitted to the sphere, 
Our missiles always make too short an arc. 
They fall, they rip the grass, they intersect 
The curve of earth, and striking, break their own; 
They make us cringe for metal-point on stone. 
But this we know, the obstacle that checked 
And tripped the body, shot the spirit on 
Further than target ever showed or shone. 



IMMIGRANTS 



IN o ship of all that under sailor or steam 
Have gathered people to us more and more 
But Pilgrim-manned the Mayflower in a dream 
Has been her anxious convey in to shore. 



291 



HANNIBAL 



Was there ever a cause too lost, 

Ever a cause that was lost too long, 

Or that showed with the lapse of time too vain 

For the generous tears of youth and song? 



-92 



THE FLOWER BOAT 

The fisherman's swapping a yarn for a yarn 
Under the hand of the village barber, 
And here in the angle of house and barn 
His deep-sea dory has found a harbor. 

At anchor she rides the sunny sod 

As full to the gunnel of flowers growing 

As ever she turned her home with cod 

From George's bank when winds were blowing. 

And I judge from that Elysian freight 
That all they ask is rougher weather, 
And dory and master will sail by fate 
To seek for the Happy Isles together. 



THE TIMES TABLE 

JVlore than half way up the pass 

Was a spring with a broken drinking glass, 

And whether the farmer drank or not 

His mare was sure to observe the spot 

By cramping the wheel on a water-bar, 

Turning her forehead with a star, 

And straining her ribs for a monster sigh; 

To which the farmer would make reply, 

1 A sigh for every so many breath, 

And for every so many sigh a death. 

That's what I always tell my wife 

Is the multiplication table of life.' 

The saying may be ever so true; 

But it's just the kind of a thing that you, 

Nor I, nor nobody else may say, 

Unless our purpose is doing harm, 

And then I know of no better way 

To close a road, abandon a farm, 

Reduce the births of the human race, 

And bring back nature in people's place. 



294 



THE INVESTMENT ^ 

Over back where they speak of life as staying 
('You couldn't call it living, for it ain't'), 
There was an old, old house renewed with paint, 
And in it a piano loudly playing. 

Out in the ploughed ground in the cold a digger, 
Among unearthed potatoes standing still, 
Was counting winter dinners, one a hill, 
With half an ear to the piano's vigor. 

All that piano and new paint back there, 
Was it some money suddenly come into? 
Or some extravagance young love had been to? 
Or old love on an impulse not to care- 
Not to sink under being man and wife, 
But get some color and music out of life? 



295 



THE LAST MOWING 

There's a place called Far-away Meadow 

We never shall mow in again, 

Or such is the talk at the farmhouse: 

The meadow is finished with men. 

Then now is the chance for the flowers 

That can't stand mowers and plowers. 

It must be now, though, in season 

Before the not mowing brings trees on, 

Before trees, seeing the opening, 

March into a shadowy claim. 

The trees are all I'm afraid of, 

That flowers can't bloom in the shade of; 

It's no more men I'm afraid of; 

The meadow is done with the tame. 

The place for the moment is ours 

For you, oh tumultuous flowers, 

To go to waste and go wild in, 

All shapes and colors of flowers, 

I needn't call you by name. 



296 



THE BIRTHPLACE 

ilere further up the mountain slope 
Than there was ever any hope, 
My father built, enclosed a spring, 
Strung chains of Avail round everything, 
Subdued the growth of earth to grass, 
And brought our various lives to pass. 
A dozen girls and boys we were. 
The mountain seemed to like the stir, 
And made of us a little while 
With always something in her smile. 
Today she wouldn't know our name. 
(No girl's, of course, has stayed the same.) 
The mountain pushed us off her knees. 
And now her lap is full of trees. 



297 



DUST IN THE EYES 

If, as they say, some dust thrown in my eyes 
Will keep my talk from getting overwise, 
I'm not the one for putting off the proof. 
Let it be overwhelming, off a roof 
And round a corner, blizzard snow for dust 
And blind me to a standstill if it must. 



298 



SITTING BY A BUSH IN BROAD 
SUNLIGHT 

\A/hen I spread out my hand here today, 
I catch no more than a ray 
To feel of between thumb and fingers; 
No lasting effect of it lingers. 

There was one time and only the one 
When dust really took in the sun; 
And from that one intake of fire 
All creatures still warmly suspire. 

And if men have watched a long time 
And never seen sun-smitten slime 
Again come to life and crawl off, 
We must not be too ready to scoff. 

God once declared he was true 
And then took the veil and withdrew, 
And remember how final a hush 
Then descended of old on the bush. 

God once spoke to people by name. 
The sun once imparted its flame 
One impulse persists as our breath; 
The other persists as our faith. 



299 



WHAT FIFTY SAID 

\Vhen I was young my teachers were the old. 

I gave up fire for form till I was cold. 

I suffered like a metal being cast. 

I went to school to age to learn the past. 

Now I am old my teachers are the young. 

What can't be moulded must be cracked and sprung, 

I strain at lessons fit to start a suture. 

I go to school to youth to learn the future. 



300 



RIDERS 

The surest thing there is is we are riders, 
And though none too successful at it, guiders, 
Through everything presented, land and tide 
And now the very air, of what we ride. 

WTiat is this talked-of mystery of birth 
But being mounted bareback on the earth? 
We can just see the infant up astride, 
His small fist buried in the bushy hide. 

There is our wildest mount a headless horse. 
But though it runs unbridled off its course, 
And all our blandishments would seem defied, 
We have ideas yet that we haven't tried. 



301 



ON LOOKING UP BY CHANCE AT 
THE CONSTELLATIONS 

You'll wait a long, long time for anything much 
To happen in heaven beyond the floats of cloud 
And the Northern Lights that run like tingling 

nerves. 
The sun and moon get crossed, but they never 

touch, 
Nor strike out fire from each other, nor crash oul 

loud. 

The planets seem to interfere in their curves, 
But nothing ever happens, no harm is done. 
We may as well go patiently on with our life, 
And look elsewhere than to stars and moon and sun 
For the shocks and changes we need to keep us sane. 
It is true the longest drouth will end in rain, 
The longest peace in China will end in strife. 
Still it wouldn't reward the watcher to stay awake 
In hopes of seeing the calm of heaven break 
On his particular time and personal sight. 
That calm seems certainly safe to last tonight. 



102 



THE BEAR 

1 he bear puts both arms around the tree above her 
And draws it down as if it were a lover 
And its choke cherries lips to kiss good-bye, 
Then lets it snap back upright in the sky. 
Her next step rocks a boulder on the wall 
(She's making her cross-country in the fall). 
Her great weight creaks the barbed- wire in its staples 
As she flings over and off down through the maples, 
Leaving on one wire tooth a lock of hair. 
Such is the uncaged progress of the bear. 
The world has room to make a bear feel free; 
The universe seems cramped to you and me. 
Man acts more like the poor bear in a cage 
That all day fights a nervous inward rage, 
His mood rejecting all his mind suggests. 
He paces back and forth and never rests 
The toe-nail click and shuffle of his feet, 
The telescope at one end of his beat, 
And at the other end the microscope, 
Two instruments of nearly equal hope, 
And in conjunction giving quite a spread. 
Or if he rests from scientific tread, 
'Tis only to sit back and sway his head 
Through ninety odd degrees of arc, it seems, 
Between two metaphysical extremes. 
He sits back on his fundamental butt 
With lifted snout and eyes (if any) shut, 

303 



(He almost looks religious but he's not), 

And back and forth he sways from cheek to cheek, 

At one extreme agreeing with one Greek, 

At the other agreeing with another Greek 

Which may be thought, but only so to speak. 

A baggy figure, equally pathetic 

When sedentary and when peripatetic. 



304 



THE EGG AND THE MACHINE 

JTle gave the solid rail a hateful kick. 

From far away there came an answering tick 

And then another tick. He knew the code: 

His hate had roused an engine up the road. 

He wished when he had had the track alone 

He had attacked it with a club or stone 

And bent some rail wide open like a switch 

So as to wreck the engine in the ditch. 

Too late though, now, he had himself to thank. 

Its click was rising to a nearer clank. 

Here it came breasting like a horse in skirts. 

(He stood well back for fear of scalding squirts.) 

Then for a moment all there was was size 

Confusion and a roar that drowned the cries 

He raised against the gods in the machine. 

Then once again the sandbank lay serene. 

The traveler's eye picked up a turtle trail, 

Between the dotted feet a streak of tail, 

And followed it to where he made out vague 

But certain signs of buried turtle's egg; 

And probing with one finger not too rough, 

He found suspicious sand, and sure enough, 

The pocket of a little turtle mine. 

If there was one egg in it there were nine, 

Torpedo-like, with shell of gritty leather 

All packed in sand to wait the trump together. 

'You'd better not disturb me any more,' 

305 



He told the distance, *I am armed for war. 
The next machine that has the power to pass 
Will get this plasm in its goggle glass.' 



A Further Range 



A LONE STRIKER 

1 he swinging mill bell changed its rate 
To tolling like the count of fate, 
And though at that the tardy ran, 
One failed to make the closing gate. 
There was a law of God or man 
That on the one who came too late 
The gate for half an hour be locked. 
His time be lost, his pittance docked. 
He stood rebuked and unemployed. 
The straining mill began to shake. 
The mill, though many, many eyed, 
Had eyes inscrutably opaque; 
So that he couldn't look inside 
To see if some forlorn machine 
Was standing idle for his sake. 
(He couldn't hope its heart would break.) 

And yet he thought he saw the scene: 
The air was full of dust of wool. 
A thousand yarns were under pull, 
But pull so slow, with such a twist, 
All day from spool to lesser spool, 
It seldom overtaxed their strength; 
They safely grew in slender length. 
And if one broke by any chance, 
The spinner saw it at a glance. 
The spinner still was there to spin. 



300 



That's where the human still came in. 
Her deft hand showed with finger rings 
Among the harp-like spread of strings. 
She caught the pieces end to end 
And, with a touch that never missed, 
Not so much tied as made them blend. 
Man's ingenuity was good. 
He saw it plainly where he stood, 
Yet found it easy to resist. 

He knew another place, a wood, 

And in it, tall as trees, were cliffs; 

And if he stood on one of these, 

'Twould be among the tops of trees, 

Their upper branches round him wreathing 

Their breathing mingled with his breathing, 

Ifif he stood! Enough of ifs! 

He knew a path that wanted walking; 

He knew a spring that wanted drinking; 

A thought that wanted further thinking; 

A love that wanted re-renewing. 

Nor was this just a way of talking 

To save him the expense of doing. 

With him it boded action, deed. 

The factory was very fine; 
He wished it all the modern speed. 
Yet, after all, 'twas not divine, 
That is to say, 'twas not a church. 
He never would assume that he'd 

310 



r5e any institution's need. 

But he said then arid still would say 

If there should ever come a day 

\Vhen industry seemed like to die 

Because he left it in the lurch, 

Or even merely seemed to pine 

For want of his appro val, why 

Come get him they knew where to search. 



TWO TRAMPS IN MUD TIME 

Out of the mud two strangers came 

And caught me splitting wood in the yard. 

And one of them put me off my aim 

By hailing cheerily 'Hit them hard!' 

I knew pretty well why he dropped behind 

And let the other go on a way. 

I knew pretty well what he had in mind: 

He wanted to take my job for pay. 

Good blocks of beech it was I split, 
As large around as the chopping block; 
And every piece I squarely hit 
Fell splinterless as a cloven rock. 
The blows that a life of self-control 
Spares to strike for the common good 
That day, giving a loose to my soul, 
I spent on the unimportant wood. 

The sun was warm but the wind was chill. 
You know how it is with an April day 
When the sun is out and the wind is still, 
You're one month on in the middle of May. 
But if you so much as dare to speak, 
A cloud comes over the sunlit arch, 
A wind comes off a frozen peak, 
And you're two months back in the middle of 
March. 

312 



A DRUMLIN WOODCHUCK 

(Jne thing has a shelving bank, 

Another a rotting plank, 

To give it cozier skies 

And make up for its lack of size. 

My own strategic retreat 
Is where two rocks almost meet, 
And still more secure and snug, 
A two-door burrow I dug. 

With those in mind at my back 
I can sit forth exposed to attack 
As one who shrewdly pretends 
That he and the world are friends. 

All we who prefer to live 
Have a little whistle we give, 
And flash, at the least alarm 
We dive down under the farm. 

We allow some time for guile 
And don't come out for a while 
Either to eat or drink. 
We take occasion to think. 

And if after the hunt goes past 
And the double-barrelled blast 



321 



But not long since in the lumber camps). 
They thought all chopping was theirs of right. 
Men of the woods and lumber jacks, 
They judged me by their appropriate tool. 
Except as a fellow handled an ax, 
They had no way of knowing a fool. 

Nothing on either side was said. 

They knew they had but to stay their stay 

And all their logic would fill my head: 

As that I had no right to play 

With what was another man's work for gain. 

My right might be love but theirs was need. 

And where the two exist in twain 

Theirs was the better right agreed. 

But yield who will to their separation, 
My object in living is to unite 
My avocation and my vocation 
As my two eyes make one in sight. 
Only where love and need are one, 
And the work is play for mortal stakes, 
Is the deed ever really done 
For Heaven and the future's sakes. 



THE WHITE-TAILED HORNET 

The white-tailed hornet lives in a balloon 

That floats against the ceiling of the woodshed. 

The exit he comes out at like a bullet 

Is like the pupil of a pointed gun. 

And having power to change his aim in flight, 

He comes out more unerring than a bullet. 

Verse could be written on the certainty 

With which he penetrates my best defense 

Of whirling hands and arms about the head 

To stab me in the sneeze-nerve of a nostril. 

Such is the instinct of it I allow. 

Yet how about the insect certainty 

That in the neighborhood of home and children 

!s such an execrable judge of motives 

As not to recognize in me the exception 

I like to think I am in everything 

One who would never hang above a bookcase 

His Japanese crepe-paper globe for trophy? 

He stung me first and stung me afterward. 

He rolled me off the field head over heels, 

And would not listen to my explanations. 

That's when I went as visitor to his house. 
As visitor at my house he is better. 
Hawking for flies about the kitchen door, 
In at one door perhaps and out another, 
Trust him then not to put you in the wrong. 

315 



He won't misunderstand your freest movements. 

Let him light on your skin unless you mind 

So many prickly grappling feet at once. 

He's after the domesticated fly 

To feed his thumping grubs as big as he is. 

Here he is at his best, but even here- 

I watched him where he swooped, he pounced, he 

struck; 

But what he found he had was just a nailhead. 
He struck a second time. Another nailhead. 
'Those are just nailheads. Those are fastened down/ 
Then disconcerted and not unannoyed, 
He stooped and struck a little huckleberry 
The way a player curls around a football. 
'Wrong shape, wrong color, and wrong scent/ 1 said. 
The huckleberry rolled him on his head. 
At last it was a fly. He shot and missed; 
And the fly circled round him in derision. 
But for the fly he might have made me think 
He had been at his poetry, comparing 
Nailhead with fly and fly with huckleberry: 
How like a fly, how very like a fly. 
But the real fly he missed would never do; 
The missed fly made me dangerously skeptic. 

Won't this whole instinct matter bear revision? 

Won't almost any theory bear revision? 

To err is human, not to, animal. 

Or so we pay the compliment to instinct, 

Only too liberal of our compliment 

316 



That really takes away instead of gives. 

Our worship, humor, conscientiousness 

Went long since to the dogs under the table. 

And served us right for having instituted 

Downward comparisons. As long on earth 

As our comparisons were stoutly upward 

With gods and angels, we were men at least, 

But little lower than the gods and angels. 

But once comparisons were yielded downward, 

Once we began to see our images 

Reflected in the mud and even dust, 

'Twas disillusion upon disillusion. 

We were lost piecemeal to the animals, 

Like people thrown out to delay the wolves. 

Nothing but fallibility was left us, 

And this day ' s work made even that seem doubtful. 



31? 



k BLUE RIBBON AT AMESBURY 

Ouch a fine pullet ought to go 
All coiffured to a winter show, 
And be exhibited, and win. 
The answer is this one has been 

And come with all her honors home. 
Her golden leg, her coral comb, 
Her fluff of plumage, white as chalk, 
Her style, were all the fancy's talk. 

It seems as if you must have heard. 
She scored an almost perfect bird. 
In her we make ourselves acquainted. 
With one a Sewell might have painted. 

Here common with the flock again, 
At home in her abiding pen, 
She lingers feeding at the trough, 
The last to let night drive her off. 

The one who gave her ankle-band, 
Her keeper, empty pail in hand, 
He lingers too, averse to slight 
His chores for all the wintry night. 

He leans against the dusty wall, 
Immured almost beyond recall, 

318 



A depth past many swinging doors 
And many litter-muffled floors. 

He meditates the breeder's art. 
He has a half a mind to start, 
With her for Mother Eve, a race 
That shall all living things displace. 

'Tis ritual with her to lay 
The full six days, then rest a day; 
At which rate barring broodiness 
She well may score an egg-success. 

The gatherer can always tell 

Her well-turned egg's brown sturdy shell, 

As safe a vehicle of seed 

As is vouchsafed to feathered breed, 

No human spectre at the feast 
Can scant or hurry her the least. 
She takes her time to take her fill. 
She whets a sleepy sated bill. 

She gropes across the pen alone 
To peck herself a precious stone. 
She waters at the patient fount. 
And so to roost, the last to mount. 

The roost is her extent of flight. 
Yet once she rises to the height, 



319 



She shoulders with a wing so strong 
She makes the whole flock move along. 

The night is setting in to blow. 
It scours the windowpane with snow, 
But barely gets from them or her 
For comment a complacent chirr. 

The lowly pen is yet a hold 
Against the dark and wind and cold 
To give a prospect to a plan 
And warrant prudence in a man. 



320 



A DRUMLIN WOODCHUCK 

vjne thing has a shelving bank, 

Another a rotting plank, 

To give it cozier skies 

And make up for its lack of size. 

My own strategic retreat 
Is where two rocks almost meet, 
And still more secure and snug, 
A two-cloor burrow I dug. 

With those in mind at my back 
I can sit forth exposed to attack 
As one who shrewdly pretends 
That he and the world are friends. 

All we who prefer to live 
Have a little whistle we give, 
And flash, at the least alarm 
We dive down under the farm. 

We allow some time for guile 
And don't come out for a while 
Either to eat or drink. 
We take occasion to think. 

And if after the hunt goes past 
And the double-barrelled blast 



321 



(Like war and pestilence 

And the loss of common sense), 

If I can with confidence say 
That still for another day, 
Or even another year, 
I will be there for you, my dear, 

It will be because, though small 
As measured again the All, 
I have been so instinctively thorough 
About my crevice and burrow. 



322 



THE GOLD HESPERIDEE 

Oquare Matthew Male's young grafted appletree 

Began to blossom at the age of five; 

And after having entertained the bee, 

And cast its flowers and all the stems but three, 

It set itself to keep those three alive; 

And downy wax the three began to thrive. 

They had just given themselves a little twist 
And turned from looking up and being kissed 
To looking down and yet not being sad, 
When came Square Hale with Let's see what we had; 
And two was all he counted (one he missed); 
But two for a beginning wasn't bad. 

His little Matthew, also five years old, 
Was led into the presence of the tree 
And raised among the leaves and duly told, 
We mustn't touch them yet, but see and see! 
And what was green would by and by be gold. 
Their name was called the Gold Hesperidee. 

As regularly as he went to feed the pig 
Or milk the cow, he visited the fruit, 
The dew of night and morning on his boot. 
Dearer to him than any barnyard brute, 
Each swung in danger on its slender twig, 
A bubble on a pipe-stem growing big. 

323 



Long since they swung as three instead of two 
One more, he thought, to take him safely through. 
Three made it certain nothing Fate could do 
With codlin moth or rusty parasite 
Would keep him now from proving with a bite 
That the name Gold Hesperidee was right. 

And so he brought them to the verge of frost. 
But one day when the foliage all went swish 
With autumn and the fruit was rudely tossed, 
He thought no special goodness could be lost 
If he fulfilled at last his summer wish, 
And saw them picked unbruised and in a dish, 

Where they could ripen safely to the eating. 

But when he came to look, no apples there 

Under, or on the tree, or anywhere, 

And the light-natured tree seemed not to care! 

'Twas Sunday and Square Hale was dressed for 

meeting, 
The final summons into church was beating. 

Just as he was without an uttered sound 
At those who'd done him such a wrong as that, 
Square Matthew Hale took off his Sunday hat 
And ceremoniously laid it on the ground, 
And leaping on it with a solemn bound, 
Danced slowly on it till he trod it flat. 



324 



Then suddenly he saw the thing he did. 
And looked around to see if he was seen. 
This was the sin that Ahaz was forbid 
(The meaning of the passage had been hid): 
To look upon the tree -when it was green 
And worship apples.What else could it mean? 

God saw him dancing in the orchard path, 
But mercifully kept the passing crowd 
From witnessing the fault of one so proud. 
And so the story wasn't told in Gath; 
In gratitude for which Square Matthew vowed 
To walk a graver man restrained <n wrath. 



325 



IN TIME OF CLOUDBURST 

Let the downpour roil and toil! 
The worst it can do to me 
Is carry some garden soil 
A little nearer the sea. 

J Tis the world-old way of the rain 
When it comes to a mountain farm 
To exact for a present gain 
A little of future harm. 

And the harm is none too sure, 
For when all that was rotted rich 
Shall be in the end scoured poor, 
When my garden has gene down ditch, 

Some force has but to apply, 
And summits shall be immersed, 
The bottom of seas raised dry 
The slope of the earth reversed. 

Then all I need do is run 
To the other end of the slope, 
And on tracts laid new to the sun, 
Begin all over to hope. 

Some worn old tool of my own 
Will be turned up by the plow, 

326 



The wood of it changed to stone, 
But as ready to wield as now. 

May my application so close 
To so endless a repetition 
Not make me tired and morose 
And resentful of man's condition. 



327 



A ROADSIDE STAND 

1 he little old house was out with a little new shed 
In front at the edge of the road where the traffic sped, 
A roadside stand that too pathetically plead, 
It would not be fair to say for a dole of bread, 
But for some of the money, the cash, whose flow 

supports 

The flower of cities from sinking and withering faint. 
The polished traffic passed with a mind ahead, 
Or if ever aside a moment, then out of sorts 
At having the landscape marred with the artless paint 
Of signs that with N turned wrong and S turned 

wrong 

Offered for sale wild berries in wooden quarts, 
Or crook-necked golden squash with silver warts, 
Or beauty rest in a beautiful mountain scene. 
You have the money, but if you want to be mean, 
Why keep your money (this crossly), and go along. 
The hurt to the scenery wouldn't be my complaint 
So much as the trusting sorrow of what is unsaid: 
Here far from the city we make our roadside stand 
And ask for some city money to feel in hand 
To try if it will not make our being expand, 
And give us the life of the moving pictures' promise 
That the party in power is said to be keeping from us. 

It is in the news that all these pitiful kin 

Are to be bought out and mercifully gathered in 

To live in villages next to the theatre and store 

328 



At the shiny desert with spots of gloom 

That might be people and are but cedar, 

Have no purpose, have no leader, 

Have never made the first move to assemble, 

And so are nothing to make her tremble. 

She can think of places that are not thus 

Without indulging a 'Not for us! 7 

Life is not so sinister-grave. 

Matter of fact has made them brave. 

He is husband, she is wife. 

She fears not him, they fear not life. 

They know where another light has been 

And more than one to theirs akin, 

But earlier out for bed tonight, 

So lost on me in my surface flight. 

This I saw when waking late, 

Going by at a railroad rate, 

Looking through wreaths of engine smoke 

Far into the lives of other folk. 



333 



THE FIGURE IN THE DOORWAY 

1 he grade surmounted, we were riding high 
Through level mountains nothing to the eye 
But scrub oak, scrub oak and the lack of earth 
That kept the oaks from getting any girth. 
But as through the monotony we ran, 
We came to where there was a living man. 
His great gaunt figure filled his cabin door, 
And had he fallen inward on the floor, 
He must have measured to the further wall. 
But we who passed were not to see him fall. 
The miles and miles he lived from anywhere 
Were evidently something he could bear. 
He stood unshaken, and if grim and gaunt, 
It was not necessarily from want. 
He had the oaks for heating and for light. 
He had a hen, he had a pig in sight. 
He had a well, he had the rain to catch. 
He had a ten by twenty garden patch. 
Nor did he lack for common entertainment. 
That I assume was what our passing train meant. 
He could look at us in our diner eating, 
And if so moved uncurl a hand in greeting. 



334 



AT WOODWARD'S GARDENS 

A boy, presuming on his intellect, 

Once showed two little monkeys in a cage 

A burning-glass they could not understand 

And never could be made to understand. 

Words are no good: to say it was a lens 

For gathering solar rays would not have helped. 

But let him show them how the weapon worked. 

He made the sun a pin-point on the nose 

Of first one then the other till it brought 

A look of puzzled dimness to their eyes 

That blinking could not seem to blink away. 

They stood arms laced together at the bars, 

And exchanged troubled glances over life. 

One put a thoughtful hand up to his nose 

As if remindedor as if perhaps 

Within a million years of an idea. 

He got his purple little knuckles stung. 

The already known had once more been confirmed 

By psychological experiment, 

And that were all the finding to announce 

Had the boy not presumed too close and long. 

There was a sudden flash of arm, a snatch 

And the glass was the monkeys' not the boy's. 

Precipitately they retired back cage 

And instituted an investigation 

On their part, though without the needed insight. 

They bit the glass and listened for the flavor. 

335 



J 'hsy broke the handle and the binding off it. 
T ben none the wiser, frankly gave it up, 
And having hid it in their bedding straw 
Against the day of prisoners' ennui, 
Came dryly forward to the bars again 
To answer for themselves: Who said it mattered 
W rut monkeys did or didn't understand? 
They might not understand a burning-glass. 
They might not understand the sun itself. 
\t's knowing what to do with things that counts. 



336 



A RECORD STRIDE 

In a Vermont bedroom closet 

With a door of two broad boards 

And for back wall a crumbling old chimney 

(And that's what their toes are to wards ), 

I have a pair of shoes standing, 
Old rivals of sagging leather, 
Who once kept surpassing each other, 
But now live even together. 

They listen for me in the bedroom 
To ask me a thing or two 
About who is too old to go walking, 
With too much stress on the who. 

I wet one last year at Moiitauk 
For a hat I had to save. 
The other I wet at the Cliff House 
In an cxtra-vagant wave. 

Two entirely different grandchildren 
Got me into my double adventure. 
But when they grow up and can read this 
I hope they won't take it for censure. 

I touch my tongue to the shoes now 
And unless my sense is at fault, 



337 



On one I can taste Atlantic, 
On the other Pacific, salt. 

One foot in each great ocean 

Is a record stride or stretch. 

The authentic shoes it was made in 

I should sell for what they would fetch. 

But instead I proudly devote them 

To my museum and muse; 

So the thick-skins needn't act thin-skinned 

About being past-active shoes. 

And I ask all to try to forgive me 
For being as over-elated 
As if I had measured the country 
And got the United States stated. 



338 



LOST IN HEAVEN 

The clouds, the source of rain, one stormy night 
Offered an opening to the source of dew; 
Which I accepted with impatient sight, 
Looking for my old skymarks in the blue. 

But stars were scarce in that part of the sky, 
And no two were of the same constellation 
No one was bright enough to identify; 
So 'twas with not ungrateful consternation, 

Seeing myself well lost once more, I sighed, 
1 Where, where in Heaven am I? But don't tell me!* 
I warned the clouds, 'by opening on me wide. 
Let's let my heavenly lostness overwhelm me/ 



339 



DESERT PLACES 

Onow falling and night falling fast oh fast 

In a field I looked into going past, 

And the ground almost covered smooth in snow, 

But a few weeds and stubble showing last. 

The woods around it have it it is theirs. 
All animals are smothered in their lairs. 
I am too absent-spirited to count; 
The loneliness includes me unawares. 

And lonely as it is that loneliness 
Will be more lonely ere it will be less 
A blanker whiteness of benighted snow 
With no expression, nothing to express. 

They cannot scare me with their empty spaces 
Between stars on stars where no human race is. 
I have it in me so much nearer home 
To scare myself with my own desert places. 



340 



LEAVES COMPARED WITH FLOWERS 

A tree's leaves may be ever so good, 

So may its bark, so may its wood; 

But unless you put the right tiling to its root 

It never will show much flower or fruit. 

But I may be one who does not care 
Ever to have tree bloom or bear. 
Leaves for smooth and bark for rough, 
Leaves and bark may be tree enough. 

Some giant trees have bloom so small 
They might as well have none at all. 
Late in life I have come on fern. 
Now lichens are due to have their turn. 

I bade men tell me which in brief, 
Which is fairer, flower or leaf. 
They did not have the wit to say, 
Leaves by night and flowers by day. 

Leaves and bark, leaves and bark, 
To lean against and hear in the dark. 
Petals I may have once pursued. 
Leaves are all my darker mood. 



341 



A LEAF TREADER 

1 have been treading ^n leaves all day until I am 

autumn-tired. 
God knows all the color and form of leaves I have 

trodden on and mired. 
Perhaps I have put forth too much strength and 

been too fierce from fear. 
I have safely trodden underfoot the leaves of another 

year. 

All summer long they were over head, more lifted 

up than I. 
To come to their final place in earth they had to 

pass me by. 
All summer long I thought I heard them threatening 

under their breath. 
And when they came it seemed with a will to carry 

me with them to death. 

They spoke to the fugitive in my heart as if it were 

leaf to leaf. 
They tapped at my eyelids and touched my lips 

with an invitation to grief. 
But it was no reason I had to go because they had 

to go. 
Now up my knee to keep on top of another year of 

snow. 



342 



THEY WERE WELCOME TO THEIR 
BELIEF 

\JTrief may have thought it was grief. 
Care may have thought it was care. 
They were welcome to their belief, 
The over important pair. 

No, it took all the snows that clung 
To the low roof over his bed, 
Beginning when he was young, 
To induce the one snow on his head. 

But whenever the roof came white 
The head in the dark below 
Was a shade less the color of night 
A shade more the color of snow. 

Grief may have thought it was grief. 
Care may have thought it was care. 
But neither one was the thief 
Of his raven color of hair. 



343 



THE STRONG ARE SAYING 
NOTHING 

ihe soil now gets a rumpling soft and damp, 
And small regard to the future of any weed. 
The final flat of the hoe's approval stamp 
Is reserved for the bed of a few selected seed. 

There is seldom more than a man to a harrowed 

piece. 

Men work olone, their lots plowed far apart, 
One stringing a chain of seed in an open crease, 
And another stumbling after a halting cart. 

To the fresh and black of the squares of early mould 
The leafless bloom of a plum is fresh and white; 
Though there's more than a doubt if the weather is 

not too cold 
For the bees to come and serve its beauty aright. 

Wind goes from farm to farm in wave on wave, 
But carries no cry of what is hoped to be. 
There may be little or much beyond the grave, 
Hut the strong are saying nothing until they see. 



344 



THE MASTER SPEED 

IN o speed of wind or water rushing by 

But you have speed far greater. You can climb 

Back up a stream of radiance to the sky, 

And back through history up the stream of time. 

And you were given this swiftness, not for haste, 

Nor chiefly that you may go where you will, 

But in the rush of everything to waste, 

That you may have the power of standing still 

Off any still or moving thing you say. 

Two such as you with such a master speed 

Cannot be parted nor be swept away 

From one another once you are agreed 

That life is only life forevermore 

Together wing to wing and oar to oar. 



345 



MOON COMPASSES 

I stole forth dimly in the dripping pause 

Between two downpours to see what there was. 

And a masked moon had spread down compass rays 

To a cone mountain in the midnight haze, 

As if the final estimate were hers, 

And as it measured in her calipers, 

The mountain stood exalted in its place. 

So love will take between the hands a face . . . 



346 



NEITHER OUT FAR NOR IN DEEP 

The people along the sand 
All turn and look one way. 
They turn their back on the land. 
They look at the sea all day. 

As long as it takes to pass 
A ship keeps raising its hull; 
The wetter ground like glass 
Reflects a standing gull. 

The land may vary more; 
But wherever the truth may be 
The water conies ashore, 
And the people look at the sea. 

They cannot look out far. 
They cannot look in deep. 
But when was that ever a bar 
To any watch they keep? 



347 



VOICE WAYS 

borne things are never clear. 
But the weather is clear tonight, 
Thanks to a clearing rain. 
The mountains are brought up near, 
The stars are brought out bright. 
Your old sweet-cynical strain 
Would come in like you here: 
'So we won't say nothing is clear.* 



348 



DESIGN 

1 found a dimpled spider, fat and white, 
On a white heal-all, holding up a moth 
Like a white piece of rigid satin cloth- 
Assorted characters of death and blight 
Mixed ready to begin the morning right, 
Like the ingredients of a witches' broth 
A snow-drop spider, a flower like froth, 
And dead wings carried like a paper kite. 

What had that flower to do with being white, 
The wayside blue and innocent heal-all? 
What brought the kindred spider to that height, 
Then steered the white moth thither in the night? 
What but design of darkness to appall? 
If design govern in a thing so small. 



349 



ON A BIRD SINGING IN ITS SLEEP 

A bird half wakened in the lunar noon 
Sang half way through its little inborn tune. 
Partly because it sang but once all night 
And that from no especial bush's height; 
Partly because it sang ventriloquist 
And had the inspiration to desist 
Almost before the prick of hostile ears, 
It ventured less in peril than appears. 
It could not have come down 1 o us so far 
Through the interstices of things ajar 
On the long bead chain of repeated birth 
To be a bird while we are men on earth 
If singing out of sleep and dream that way 
Had made it much more easily a prey. 



350 



UNHARVESTED 

A scent of ripeness from over a wall. 
And come to leave the routine road 
And look for what had made me stall, 
There sure enough was an appletrec 
That had eased itself of its summer load. 
And of all but its trivial foliage free, 
Now breathed as light as a lady's fan. 
For there there had been an apple fall 
As complete as the apple had given man. 
The ground was one circle of solid red. 

May something go always unharvested! 
May much stay out of our stated plan, 
Apples or something forgotten and left, 
So smelling their sweetness would be no theft. 



351 



THERE ARE ROUGHLY ZONES 

We sit indoors and talk of the cold outside. 

And every gust that gathers strength and heaves 

Is a threat to the house. But the house has long been 

tried. 

We think of the tree. If it never again has leaves, 
We'll know, we say, that this was the night it died. 
It is very far north, we admit, to have brought the 

peach. 

What comes over a man, is it soul or mind 
That to no limits and bounds he can stay confined? 
You would say his ambition was to extend the reach 
Clear to the Arctic of every living kind. 
Why is his nature forever so hard to teach 
That though there is no fixed line between wrong 

and right, 

There are roughly zones whose laws must be obeyed. 
There is nothing much we can do for the tree tonight. 
But we can't help feeling more than a little betrayed 
That the northwest wind should rise to such a height 

o 

fust when the cold went down so many below. 
The tree has no leaves and may never have them again. 
We must wait till some months hence in the spring 

to know. 

But if it is destined never again to grow, 
It can blame this limitless trait in the hearts of men. 



352 



A TRIAL RUN 

I said to myself almost in prayer, 

It will start hair raising currents of air 

\Vhen you give it the livid metal-sap. 

It will make a homicidal roar. 

It will shake its cast stone reef of floor. 

It will gather speed till your nerves prepare 

To hear it wreck in a thunder-clap. 

But stand your ground 

As they say in war. 

It is cotter-pinned, it is bedded true. 

Everything its parts can do 

Has been thought out and accounted for. 

Your least touch sets it going round, 

And when to stop it rests with you. 



353 



NOT QUITE SOCIAL 

Oome of you will be glad I did what I did, 
And the rest won't want to punish me too severely 
For finding a thing to do that though not forbid 
Yet wasn't enjoined and wasn't expected clearly. 

To punish me over cruelly wouldn't be right 
For merely giving you once more gentle proof 
That the city's hold on a man is no more tight 
Than when its walls rose higher than any roof. 

You may taunt me with not being able to flee the 

earth. 

You have me there, but loosely as I would be held. 
The way of understanding is partly mirth. 
I would not be taken as ever having rebelled. 

And anyone is free to condemn me to death 
If he leaves it to nature to carry out the sentence. 
I shall will to the common stock of air my breath 
And pay a death-tax of fairly polite repentance. 



354 



PROVIDE PROVIDE 

The witch that came (the withered hag) 
To wash the steps with pail and rag, 
Was once the beauty Abishag, 

The picture pride of Hollywood. 
Too many fall from great and good 
For you to doubt the likelihood. 

Die early and avoid the fate. 
Or if predestined to die late, 
Make up your mirid to die in state- 
Make the whole stock exchange your own! 
If need be occupy a throne, 
Where nobody can call you crone. 

Some have relied on what they knew; 

Others on being simply true. 

What worked for them might work for you. 

No memory of having starred 

Atones for later disregard, 

Or keeps the end from being hard. 

Better to go down dignified 

With boughten friendship at your side 

Than none at all. Provide, provide! 



355 



TEN MILLS 

PRECAUTION 

I never dared be radical when young 

For fear it would make me conservative when old. 

THE SPAN OF LIFE 

The old dog barks backward without getting up. 
I can remember when he was a pup. 

THE WRIGHTS' BIPLANE 

This biplane is the shape of hi] man flight. 
Its name might better be First Motor Kite. 
Its makers' name Time cannot get that wrong. 
For it was writ in heaven doubly Wright. 

ASSERTIVE 

Let me be the one 
To do what is done. 

EVIL TENDENCIES CANCEL 

Will the blight end the chestnut? 
The farmers rather guess not. 
It keeps smouldering at the roots 
And sending up new shoots 
Till another parasite 
Shall come to end the blight. 

356 



PERTINAX 

Let chaos storm! 

Let cloud shapes swarm! 

I wait for form. 

WASPISH 

On glossy wires artistically bent, 
He draws himself up to his full extent. 
His natty wings with self-assurance perk. 
His stinging quarters menacingly work. 
Poor egotist, he has no way of knowing 
But he's as good as anybody going. 

ONE GUESS 

He has dust in his eyes and a fan for a wing, 

A leg akimbo with which he can sing, 

And a mouthful of dye stuff instead of a sting. 

THE HARDSHIP OF ACCOUNTING 

Never ask of money spent 
Wliere the spender thinks it went. 
Nobody was ever meant 
To remember or invent 
What he did with every cent. 

NOT ALL THERE 

I turned to speak to God 
About the world's despair; 
But to make bad matters worse 



357 



I found God wasn't there. 
God turned to speak to me 
(Don't anybody laugh) 
God found I wasn't there 
At least not over half. 

IN DIVES > DIVE 

It is late at night and still I am losing, 
But still I am steady and unaccusing. 

As long as the Declaration guards 

My right to be equal in number of cards, 

It is nothing to me who runs the Dive. 
Let's have a look at another five. 



358 



THE VINDICTIVES 

You like to hear about gold. 

A king filled his prison room 

As full as the room could hold 

To the top of his reach on the wall 

With every known shape of the stuff. 

'Twas to buy himself off his doom. 

But it wasn't ransom enough. 

His captors accepted it all, 

But didn't let go of the king. 

They made him send out a call 

To his subjects to gather them more. 

And his subjects wrung all they could wring 

Out of temple and palace and store. 

But when there seemed no more to bring, 

His captors convicted the king 

Of once having started a war, 

And strangled the wretch with a string. 

But really that gold was not half 
That a king might have hoped to compel- 
Not a half, not a third, not a tithe. 
The king had scarce ceased to writhe, 
When hate gave a terrible laugh, 
Like a manhole opened to Hell. 
If gold pleased the conqueror, well, 
That gold should be the one thing 
The conqueror henceforth should lack. 

359 



They gave no more thought to the king. 
All joined in the game of hide-gold. 
They swore all the gold should go back 
Deep into the earth whence it came. 

Their minds ran on cranny and crack. 
All joined in the maddening game. 
The tale is still boastingly told 
Of many a treasure by name " 
That vanished into the black 
And put out its light for the foe. 

That self-sack and self-overthrow 
That was the splendidest sack 
Since the forest Germans sacked Rome 
And took the gold candlesticks home. 

One Inca prince on the rack, 

\nd late in his last hour alive, 

Told them in what lake to dive 

To seek what they seemed so to want. 

They dived and nothing was found. 

He told them to dive till they drowned. 

The whole fierce conquering pack 

Hunted and tortured and raged. 

There were suns of story and vaunt 

They searched for into Brazil 

Their tongues hanging out unassuaged. 



360 



But the conquered grew meek and still. 
They slowly and silently aged. 
They kept their secrets and died, 
Maliciously satisfied. 
One knew of a burial hole 
In the floor of a tribal cave, 
Where under deep ash and charcoal 
And cracked bones, human and beast, 
The midden of feast upon feast, 

Was coiled in its last resting grave 
The great treasure wanted the most, 
The great thousand-linked gold chain, 
Each link of a hundred weight, 
That once between post and post 
(In-leaning under the strain), 
And looped ten times back and forth, 
Had served as a palace gate. 
Some said it had gone to the coast, 
Some over the mountains east, 
Some into the country north, 
On the backs of a single-file host, 
Commanded by one sun-priest, 
And raising a dust with a train 
Of flashing links in the sun. 
No matter what some may say. 
(The saying is never done.) 
There bright in the filth it lay 
Untarnished by rust and decay. 
And be all plunderers curst. 

361 



'The best way to hate is the worst. 
'Tis to find what the hated need, 
Never mind of what actual worth, 
And wipe that out of the earth. 
Let them die of unsatisfied greed, 
Of unsatisfied love of display, 
Of unsatisfied love of the high, 
Unvulgar, unsoiled, and ideal. 
Let their trappings be taken away. 
Let them suffer starvation and die 
Of being brought down to the real/ 



362 



THE BEARER OF EVIL TIDINGS 

1 he bearer of evil tidings,, 
Wlien he was halfway there, 
Remembered that evil tidings 
Were a dangerous thing to bear. 

3o when he came to the parting 
Where one road led to the throne 
And one went off to the mountains 
And into the wild unknown, 

He took the one to the mountains. 
He ran through the Vale of Cashmere, 
He ran through the rhododendrons 
Till he came to the land of Pamir. 

And there in a precipice valley 
A girl of his age he met 
Took him home to her bower, 
Or he might be running yet. 

She taught him her tribe's religion: 
How ages and ages since 
A princess en route from China 
To marry a Persian prince 



Had been found with child; and her army 
Had come to a troubled halt. 



363 



And though a god was the father 
And nobody else at fault, 

It had seemed discreet to remain there 
And neither go on nor back. 
So they stayed and declared a village 
There in the land of the Yak. 

And the child that came of the princess 
Established a royal line, 
And his mandates were given heed to 
Because he was born divine. 

And that was why there were people 
On one Himalayan shelf; 
And the bearer of evil tidings 
Decided to stay there himself. 

At least he had this in common 
With the race he chose to adopt: 
They had both of them had their reasons 
For stopping where they had stopped. 

As for his evil tidings, 
Belshazzar's overthrow, 
Why hurry to tell Belshazzar 
What soon enough he would know? 



364 



IRIS BY NIGHT 

One misty evening, one another's guide, 

We two were groping down a Malvern side 

The last wet fields and dripping hedges home. 

There came a moment of confusing lights, 

Such as according to belief in Rome 

Were seen of old at Memphis on the heights 

Before the fragments of a former sun 

Could concentrate anew and rise as one. 

Light was a paste of pigment in our eyes. 

And then there was a moon and then a scene 

So watery as to seem submarine; 

In which we two stood saturated, drowned. 

The clover-mingled rowan on the ground 

Had taken all the water it could as dew, 

And still the air was saturated too, 

Its airy pressure turned to water weight. 

Then a small rainbow like a trellis gate, 

A very small moon-made prismatic bow, 

Stood closely over us through which to go. 

And then we were vouchsafed the miracle 

That never yet to other two befell 

And I alone of us have lived to tell. 

A wonder! Bow and rainbow as it bent, 

Instead of moving with us as we went, 

(To keep the pots of gold from being found) 

It lifted from its dewy pediment 

Its two mote-swimming many-colored ends, 

365 



And gathered them together in a ring. 
And we stood in it softly circled round 
From all division time or foe can bring 
In a relation of elected friends. 



366 



BUILD SOIL-A POLITICAL 
PASTORAL 

\Vhy Tityrus! But you've forgotten me. 

Fm Meliboeus the potato man, 

The one you had the talk with, you remember, 

Here on this very campus years ago. 

Hard times have struck me and I'm on the move. 

Fve had to give my interval farm up 

For interest, and I've bought a mountain farm 

For nothing down, all-out-doors of a place, 

All woods and pasture only fit for sheep. 

But sheep is what Fm going into next. 

Fm done forever with potato crops 

At thirty cents a bushel. Give me sheep. 

I know wool's down to seven cents a pound. 

But I don't calculate to sell my wool. 

I didn't my potatoes. I consumed them. 

F1I dress up in sheep's clothing and eat sheep. 

The Muse takes care of you. You live by writing 

Your poems on a farm and call that farming. 

Oh I don't blame you. I say take life easy. 

I should myself, only I don't know how. 

But have some pity on us who have to work. 

Why don't you use your talents as a writer 

To advertise our farms to city buyers, 

Or else write something to improve food prices. 

Get in a poem toward the next election. 

36? 



Oh Meliboeus, I have half a mind 

To take a writing hand in politics. 

Before now poetry has taken notice 

Of wars, and what are wars but politics 

Transformed from chronic to acute and bloody? 

I may be wrong, but Tityrus to me 

The times seem revolutionary bad. 

The question is whether they've reached a depth 

Of desperation that would warrant poetry's 

Leaving love's alternations, joy and grief, 

The weather's alternations, summer and winter, 

Our age-long theme, for the uncertainty 

Of judging who is a contemporary liar 

Who in particular, when all alike 

Get called as much in clashes of ambition. 

Life may be tragically bad, and I 

Make bold to sing it so, but do I dare 

Name names and tell you who by name is wicked? 

Whittier's luck with Skipper Ireson awes me. 

Many men's luck with Greatest Washington 

(Who sat for Stuart's portrait, but who sat 

Equally for the nation's Constitution). 

I prefer to sing safely in the realm 

Of types, composite and imagined people: 

To affirm there is such a thing as evil 

Personified, but ask to be excused 

From saying on a jury here's the guilty. 



368 



I doubt it you're convinced the times are bad. 
I keep my eye on Congress, Meliboeus. 
They're in the best position of us all 
To know if anything is very wrong. 
1 mean they could be trusted to give the alarm 
If earth were thought about to change its axis, 
Or a star coming to dilate the sun. 
As long as lightly all their live-long sessions, 
Like a yard full of school boys out at recess 
Before their plays and games were organized, 
They yelling mix tag, hide-and-seek, hop-scotch, 
And leap frog in each other's way, all's well. 
Let newspapers profess to fear the worst! 
Nothing's portentous, I am reassured. 

Is socialism needed, do you think? 

We have it now. For socialism is 
An clement in any government. 
There's no such thing as socialism pure 
Except as an abstraction of the mind. 
There's only democratic socialism 
Monarchic socialism oligarchic, 
The last being what they seem to have in Russia. 
You often get it most in monarchy, 
Least in democracy. In practice, pure, 
I don't know what it would be. No one knows. 
I have no doubt like all the loves when 
Philosophized together into one- 
One sickness of the body and the soul. 

369 



Thank God our practice holds the loves apart 

Beyond embarrassing self-consciousness 

Where natural friends are met, where dogs are 

kept, 

Where women pray with priests. There is no love. 
There's only love of men and women, love 
Of children, love of friends, of men, of God, 
Divine love, human love, parental love, 
Roughly discriminated for the rough. 

Poetry, itself once more, is back in love. 

Pardon the analogy, my Meliboeus, 
For sweeping me away. Let's see, where was I? 
But don't you think more should be socialized 
Than is? 

What should you mean by socialized? 

Made good for everyone things like inventions- 
Made so we all should get the good of them 
All, not just great exploiting businesses. 

We sometimes only get the bad of them. 

In your sense of the word ambition has 

Been socialized the first propensity 

To be attempted. Greed may well come next. 

But the worst one of all to leave uncurbed, 

Unsocialized, is ingenuity: 

Which for no sordid self-aggrandizement, 

For nothing but its own blind satisfaction 

370 



(In this it is as much like hate as love) 

Works in the dark as much against as for us. 

Even while we talk some chemist at Columbia 

Is stealthily contriving wool from jute 

That when let loose upon the grazing world 

Will put ten thousand farmers out of sheep. 

Everyone asks for freedom for himself, 

The man free love, the business man free trade, 

The writer and talker free speech and free press. 

Political ambition has been taught, 

By being punished back, it is not free: 

It must at some point gracefully refrain. 

Greed has been taught a little abnegation 

And shalUbe more before we're done with it. 

It is just fool enough to think itself 

Self-taught. But our brute snarling and lashinj 

taught it. 

None shall be as ambitious as he can. 
None should be as ingenious as he could, 
Not if I had my say. Bounds should be set 
To ingenuity for being so cruel 
In bringing change unheralded on the unready, 

I elect you to put the curb on it. 

Were I dictator, I'll tell you what Fd do. 

What should you do? 

Fd let things take their course 
And then Fd claim the credit for the outcome. 

371 



You'd make a sort of safety-first dictator. 

Don't let the things I say against myself 

Betray you into taking sides against me, 

Or it might get you into trouble with me. 

Pm not afraid to prophesy the future, 

And be judged by the outcome, Meliboeus. 

Listen and I will take my dearest risk. 

We're always too much out or too much in. 

At present from a cosmical dilation 

We're so much out that the odds are against 

Our ever getting inside in again. 

But inside in is where we've got to get. 

My friends all know Pm interpersonal. 

But long before Pm interpersonal 

Away 'way down inside Pm personal. 

Just so before we're international 

We're national and act as nationals. 

The colors are kept unmixed on the palette, 

Or better on dish plates all around the room, 

So the effect when they are mixed on canvas 

May seem almost exclusively designed. 

Some minds are so confounded intermental 

They remind me of pictures on a palette: 

'Look at what happened. Surely some God pinxit. 

Come look at my significant mud pie.' 

It's hard to tell which is the worse abhorrence 

Whether it's persons pied or nations pied. 

Don't let me seem to say the exchange, the encounter, 

372 



May not be the important thing at last. 
It well may be. We meet I don't say when 
But must bring to the meeting the maturest, 
The longest-saved-up, raciest, localest 
We have strength of reserve in us to bring. 

Tityrus, sometimes I'm perplexed myself 
To find the good of commerce. Why should 1 
Have to sell you my apples and buy yours? 
It can't be just to give the robber a chance 
To catch them and take toll of them in transit. 
Too mean a thought to get much comfort out of. 
I figure that like any bandying 
Of words or toys, it ministers to health. 
It vory likely quickens and refines us. 

To market 'tis our destiny to go. 
But much as in the end we bring for sale there 
There is still more we never bring or should bring; 
More that should be kept backthe soil for 

instance 

In my opinion, though we both know poets 
Who fall all over each other to bring soil 
And even subsoil and hardpan to market. 
To sell the hay off, let alone the soil, 
Is an unpardonable sin in farming. 
The moral is, make a late start to market. 
Let me preach to you, will you Meliboeus? 
Preach on. I thought you were already preaching. 
But preach and see if I can tell the difference. 

373 



Needless to say to you, my argument 

Is not to lure the city to the country. 

Let those possess the land and only those, 

Who love it with a love so strong and stupid 

That they may be abused and taken advantage of 

And made fun of by business, law and art; 

They still hang on. That so much of the earth's 

Unoccupied need not make us uneasy. 

We don't pretend to complete occupancy. 

The world's one globe, human society 

Another softer globe that slightly flattened 

Rests on the world, and clinging slowly rolls. 

We have our own round shape to keep unbroken. 

The world's size has no more to do with us 

Than has the universe's. We arc balls, 

We are round from the same source of roundness. 

We are both round because the mind is round, 

Because all reasoning is in a circle. 

At least that's why the universe is round. 

If what you're preaching is a line of conduct, 
[ust what am I supposed to do about it? 
Reason in circles? 

No, refuse to be 

Seduced back to the land by any claim 
The land may seem to have on man to use it. 
Let none assume to till the land but farmers. 
I only speak to you as one of them. 
You shall go to your run-out mountain farm, 

374 



Poor cast-away of commerce, and so live 
That none shall ever see you come to market- 
Not for a long long time. Plant, breed, produce, 
But what you raise or grow, why feed it out, 
Eat it or plow it under where it stands 
To build the soil. For what is more accursed 
Than an impoverished soil pale and metallic? 
What cries more to our kind for sympathy? 
I'll make a compact with you, Meliboeus, 
To match you deed for deed and plan for plan. 
Friends crowd around me with their five year plans 
That Soviet Russia has made fashionable. 
You come to me and I'll unfold to you 
A five year plan I call so, not because 
It takes ten years or so to carry out, 
Rather because it took five years at least 
To think it out. Come close, let us conspire- 
In self-restraint, if in restraint of trade. 
You will go to your run-out mountain farm 
And do what I command you, I take care 
To command only what you meant to do 
Anyway. That is my style of dictator. 
Build soil. Turn the farm in upon itself 
Until it can contain itself no more, 
But sweating-full, drips wine and oil a little. 
I will go to my run-out social mind 
And be as unsocial with it as I can. 
The thought I have, and my first impulse is 
To take to market I will turn it under. 
The thought from that thought 1 will turn it under 

375 



so on to the limit of my nature. 
We are too much out, and if we won't draw in 
We shall be driven in. I was brought up 
A state-rights free-trade Democrat. What's that ? 
An inconsistency. The state shall be 
Laws to itself, it seems, and yet have no 
Control of what it sells or what it buys. 
Suppose someone comes near me who in rate 
Of speech and thinking is so much my better 
I am imposed on, silenced and discouraged. 
Do I submit to being supplied by him 
As the more economical producer, 
More wonderful, more beautiful producer? 
No. I unostentatiously move off 
Far enough for my thought-flow to resume. 
Thought product and food product are to me 
Nothing compared to the producing of them 
I sent you once a song with the refrain: 

Let me be the one 
To do what is done 

My share at least lest I be empty-idle. 
Keep off each other and keep each other off. 
You see the beauty of my proposal is 
It needn't wait on general revolution. 
I bid you to a one-man revolution 
The only revolution that is coming. 
We're too unseparate out among each other 
With goods to sell and notions to impart. 

376 



A youngster comes to me with half a quatrain 
To ask me if I think it worth the pains 
Of working out the rest, the other half. 
I am brought guaranteed young prattle poems 
Made publicly in school, above suspicion 
Of plagiarism and help of cheating parents. 
We congregate embracing from distrust 
As much as love, and too close in to strike 
And be so very striking. Steal away 
The song says. Steal away and stay away. 
Don't join too many gangs. Join few if any. 
Join the United States and join the family 
But not much in between unless a college. 
Is it a bargain, Shepherd Meliboeus? 

Probably but you're far too fast and strong 
For my mind to keep working in your presence. 
I can tell better after I get home, 
Better a month from now when cutting posts 
Or mending fence it all comes back to me 
What I was thinking when you interrupted 
My life-train logic. I agree with you 
We're too unseparate. And going home 
From company means coming to our senses. 



377 



A MISSIVE MISSILE 

Oome one in ancient Mas cT Azil 
Once took a little pebble wheel 
And dotted it with red for me, 
And sent it to me years and years 
A million years to be precise 
Across the barrier of ice: 
Two round dots and a ripple streak, 
So vivid as to seem to speak. 
But what imperfectly appears 
Is whether the two dots were tears, 
Two tear drops, one for either eye, 
And the wave line a shaken sigh. 
But no, the color used is red. 
Not tears but drops of blood instead. 
The line must be a jagged blade. 
The sender must have had to die, 
And wanted some one now to know 
His death was sacrificial- votive. 
So almost clear and yet obscure. 
If only anyone were sure 
A motive then was still a motive. 
O you who bring this to my hand, 
You are no common messenger 
(Your badge of office is a spade). 
It grieves me to have had you stand 
So long for nothing. No reply 
There is no answer, I'm afraid, 

378 



Across the icy barrier 

For my obscure petitioner. 

Suppose his ghost is standing by 

Importunate to give the hint 

And be successfully conveyed. 

How anyone can fail to see 

Where perfectly in form and tint 

The metaphor, the symbol lies! 

Why will I not analogize? 

(I do too much in some men's eyes.) 

Oh slow uncomprehending me, 

Enough to make a spirit moan 

Or rustle in a bush or tree. 

I have the ochre- written flint, 

The two dots and the ripple line. 

The meaning of it is unknown, 

Or else I fear entirely mine, 

All modern, nothing ancient in't, 

Unsatisfying to us each. 

Far as we aim our signs to reach, 

Far as we often make them reach, 

Across the soul-from-soul abyss, 

There is an aeon-limit set 

Beyond which they are doomed to miss. 

Two souls may be too widely met. 

That sad-with-distance river beach 

"With mortal longing may beseech; 

It cannot speak as far as this. 



379 



A Witness Tree 



BEECH 

rVhere my imaginary line 
Bends square in woods., an iron spine 
And pile of real rocks have beenfounded. 
And off this corner in the wild, 
Where these are driven in and piled, 
One tree, by being deeply wounded, 
Has been impressed as Witness Tree 
And made commit to memory 
My proof of being not unbounded. 
Thus truth's established and borne out, 
Though circumstanced with dark and doubt- 
Though by a world of doubt surrounded. 

THE MOODIE FORESTER 



SYCAMORE 

Zaccheus he 
Did climb the tree 
Our Lord to see. 

THE I EW F. NGLAND PRIMER 



383 



THE SILKEN TENT 



is as in a field a silken tent 
At midday when a sunny summer breeze 
Has dried the dew and all its ropes relent, 
So that in guys it gently sways at ease, 
And its supporting central cedar pole, 
That is its pinnacle to heavenward 
And signifies the sureness of the soul, 
Seems to owe naught to any single cord, 
But strictly held by none, is loosely bound 
By countless silken ties of love and thought 
To everything on earth the compass round, 
And only by one's going slightly taut 
In the capriciousness of summer air 
Is of the slightest bondage made aware. 



385 



ALL REVELATION 

A head thrusts in as for the view, 
But where it is it thrusts in from 
Or what it is it thrusts into 
By that Cyb'laean avenue, 
And what can of its coming come, 

And whither it will be withdrawn, 
And what take hence or leave behind, 
These things the mind has pondered on 
A moment and still asking gone. 
Strange apparition of the mind! 

But the impervious geode 
Was entered, and its inner crust 
Of crystals with a ray cathode 
At every point and facet glowed 
In answer to the mental thrust. 

Eyes seeking the response of eyes 
Bring out the stars, bring out the flowers, 
Thus concentrating earth and skies 
So none need be afraid of size. 
All revelation has been ours. 



386 



HAPPINESS MAKES UP IN HEIGHT 
FOR WHAT IT LACKS IN LENGTH 

Oh, stormy stormy world, 
The days you were not swirled 
Around with mist and cloud. 
Or wrapped as in a shroud, 
And the sun's brilliant ball 
Was not in part or all 
Obscured from mortal view- 
Were days so very few 
I can but wonder whence 
I get the lasting sense 
Ot so much warmth and light. 
If my mistrust is right 
It may be altogether 
From one day's perfect weather, 
When starting clear at dawn, 
The day swept clearly on 
To finish clear at eve. 
I verily believe 
My fair impression may 
Be all from that one day 
No shadow crossed but ours 
As through its blazing flowers 
We went from house to wood 
For change of solitude. 



38? 



COME IN 

rVs I came to the edge of the woodsJ 
Thrush music hark! ' 

Now if it was dusk outside, 
Inside it was dark. 

Too dark in the woods for a bird 
By sleight of wing 
To better its perch for the night, 
Though it still could sing. 

The^last of the light of the sun 
That had died in the west^ 
Still lived for one song more 
In a thrush's breast. 

Far in the pillared dark 
Thrush music went 
Almost like a call to come in 
To the dark and lament. 

But no, I was out for stars: 
I would not come in. 
\ meant not even if asked, 
\nd I hadn't been. 



I COULD GIVE ALL TO TIME 

To Time it never seems that he is brave 
To set himself against the peaks of snow 
To lay them level with the running wave, 
Nor is he overjoyed when they lie low, 
But only grave, contemplative and grave. 

What now is inland shall be ocean isle, 
Then eddies playing round a sunken reef 
Like the curl at the corner of a smile; 
And I could share Time's lack of joy or grief 
At such a planetary change of style. 

I could give all to Time except except 

What I myself have held. But why declare 

The things forbidden that while the Customs slept 

I have crossed to Safety with? For I am There, 

And what I would not part with I have kept. 



389 



CAKPE DIEM 

Age saw two quiet children 

Go loving by at twilight, 

He knew not whether homeward. 

Or outward from the village, 

Or (chimes were ringing) churchward. 

He waited (they were strangers) 

Till they were oat of hearing 

To bid them both be happy. 

u Be happy, happy, happy, 

And seize the day of pleasure." 

The age-long theme is Age's. 

'Twas Age imposed on poems 

Their gather-roses burden 

To warn against the danger 

That overtaken lovers 

From being overflooded 

With happiness should have it 

And yet not know they have it. 

But bid life seize the present? 

It lives less in the present 

Than in the future always, 

And less in both together 

Than in the past. The present 

Is too much for the senses, 

Too crowding, too confusing 

;Too present to imagine. 

390 



THE WIND AND THE RAIN 



1 hat far-off day the leaves in flight 
Were letting in the colder light. 
A season-ending wind there blew 
That as it did the forest strew 
I leaned on with a singing trust 
And let it drive me deathward too. 
V/ith breaking step I stabbed the dust, 
Yet did not much to shorten stride. 
I sang of deathbut had I known 
The many deaths one must have died 
Before he came to meet his own! 
Oh, should a child be left unwarned 
That any song in which he mourned 
Would be as if he prophesied? 
It were unworthy of the tongue 
To let the half of life alone 
And play the good without the ill. 
And yet 'twould seem that what is sung 
In happy sadness by the young 
F"ate has no choice but to fulfill. 

II * 

Flowers in the desert heat 

Contrive to bloom 

On melted mountain water led by flume 

To wet their feet. 



391 



But something in it still is incomplete. 

Before I thought the wilted to exalt 

With water I would see them water-bowed. 

I would pick up all ocean less its salt, 

And though it were as much as cloud could bear 

"Would load it on to cloud, 

And rolling it inland on roller air, 

Would empty it unsparing on the flower 

That past its prime lost petals in the flood, 

(Who cares but for the future of the bud?) 

And all the more the mightier the shower 

Would run in under it to get my share. 

*Tis not enough on roots and in the mouth, 
But give me water heavy on the head 
In all the passion of a broken drouth. 

And there is always more than should be said. 

As strong is rain without as wine within, 
As magical as sunlight on the skin. 

I have been one no dwelling could contain 
When there was rain; 

But I must forth at dusk, my time of day, 
To see to the unburdening of skies. 
Rain was the tears adopted by my eyes 
That have none left to stay. 

392 



THE MOST OF IT 

Jrle thought he kept the universe alone; 

For all the voice in answer he could wake 

Was but the mocking echo of his own 

From some tree-hidden cliff across the lake. 

Some morning from the boulder-broken beach 

He would cry out on life, that what it wants 

Is not its own love back in copy speech, 

But counter-love, original response. 

And nothing ever came of what he cried 

Unless it was the embodiment that crashed 

In the cliff's talus on the other side, 

And then in the far distant water splashed, 

But after a time allowed for it to swim, 

Instead of proving human when it neared 

And someone else additional to him, 

As a great buck it powerfully appeared, 

Pushing the crumpled water up ahead, 

And landed pouring like a waterfall, 

And stumbled through the rocks with horny tread, 

And forced the underbrush and that was all. 



393 



NEVER AGAIN WOULD 

BIRDS' SONG BE THE SAME 

lie would declare and could himself believe 
That the birds there in all the garden round 
From having heard the daylong voice of Eve 
Had added to their own an oversound, 
Her tone of meaning but without the words. 
Admittedly an eloquence so soft 
Could only have had an influence on birds 
When call or laughter carried it aloft. 
Be that as may be, she was in their song 
Moreover her voice upon their voices crossed 
Had now persisted in the woods so long 
That probably it never would be lost. 
Never again would birds' song be the same. 
And to do that to birds was why she came. 



394 



WILFUL HOMING 

It is getting dark and time he drew to a house, 
But the blizzard blinds him to any house ahead. 
The storm gets down his neck in an icy souse 
That sucks his breath like a wicked cat in bed. 

The snow blows on him and off him, exerting force 
Downward to make him sit astride a drift, 
Imprint a saddle and calmly consider a course. 
He peers out shrewdly into the thick and swift. 

Since he means to come to a door he will come to a 

door, 

Although so compromised of aim and rate 
He may fumble wide of the knob a yard or more, 
And to those concerned he may seem a little late, 



395 



A CLOUD SHADOW 

A breeze discovered my open book 
And began to flutter the leaves to look 
For a poem there used to be on Spring. 
I tried to tell her "There's no such thing!" 

For whom would a poem on Spring be by? 
The breeze disdained to make reply; 
And a cloud-shadow crossed her face 
For fear I would make her miss the place. 



396 



THE QUEST OF THE 
PURPLE-FRINGED 



I felt the chill of the meadow underfoot, 

But the sun overhead; 

And snatches of verse and song of scenes like this 

I sung or said. 

I skirted the margin alders for miles and miles 
In a sweeping line. 

The day was the day by every flower that blooms, 
But I saw no sign. 

Yet further I went to be before the scythe, 

For the grass was high; 

Till I saw the path where the slender fox had come 

And gone panting by. 

Then at last and following him I found- 
In the very hour 
When the color flushed to the petals it must have 

been 
The far-sought flower. 

There stood the purple spires with no breath of air 
Nor headlong bee 

To disturb their perfect poise the livelong day 
'Neath the alder tree. 

397 



i only knelt and putting the boughs aside 
Looked., or at most 

Counted them all to the buds in the copse's depth 
That were pale as a ghost. 

Then I arose and silently wandered home, 
And I for one 

Said that the fall might come and whirl of leaves. 
For summer was done. 



398 



THE GIFT OUTRIGHT 

1 he land was ours before we were the land's. 
She was our land more than a hundred years 
Before we were her people. She was ours 
In Massachusetts, in Virginia, 
But we were England's, still colonials, 
Possessing what we still were unpossessed by, 
Possessed by what we now no more possessed. 
Something we were withholding made us weak 
Until we found it was ourselves 
We were withholding from our land of living, 
And forthwith found salvation in surrender. 
Such as we were we gave ourselves outright 
(The deed of gift was many deeds of war) 
To the land vaguely realizing westward, 
But still unstoried, artless, uiienhanced, 
Such as she was, such as she would become. 



399 



TRIPLE BRONZE 

ihe Infinite's being so wide 
Is the reason the Powers provide 
For inner defense my hide. 
For next defense outside 

I make myself this time 
Of wood or granite or lime 
A wall too hard for crime 
Either to breach or climb. 

Then a number of us agree 
On a national boundary. 
And that defense makes three 
Between too much and me. 



400 



OUR HOLD ON THE PLANET 

\Ve asked for rain. It didn't flash and roar. 

It didn't lose its temper at our demand 

And blow a gale. It didn't misunderstand 

And give us more than our spokesman bargained 

for; 

And just because we owned to a wish for rain, 
Send us a flood and bid us be damned and drown. 
It gently threw us a glittering shower down. 
And when we had taken that into the roots of grain, 
It threw us another and then another still 
Till the spongy soil again was natal wet. 
We may doubt the just proportion of good to ill. 
There is much in nature against us. But we forget: 
Take nature altogether since time began, 
Including human nature, in peace and war, 
And it must be a little more in favor of man, 
Say a fraction of one per cent at the very least, 
Or our number living wouldn't be steadily more, 
Our hold on the planet wouldn't have so increased. 



401 



TO A YOUNG WRETCH 

(BOETHIAN) 

As gay for you to take your father's axe 

As take his gun rod to go hunting fishing. 

You nick my spruce until its fiber cracks. 

It gives up standing straight and goes down swishing. 

You link an arm in its arm and you lean 

Across the light snow homeward smelling green. 

[ could have bought you just as good a tree 

To frizzle resin in a candle flame, 

And what a saving 'twould have meant to me. 

But tree by charity is not the same 

As tree by enterprise and expedition. 

I must not spoil your Christmas with contrition. 

It is your Christmases against my woods. 
But even where thus opposing interests kill, 
They are to be thought of as opposing goods 
Oftener than as conflicting good and ill; 
Which makes the war god seem no special dunce 
For always fighting on both sides at once. 

And though in tinsel chain and popcorn rope, 
My tree a captive in your window bay 
Has lost its footing on my mountain slope 
And lost the stars of heaven, may, oh, may 
The symbol star it lifts against your ceiling 
Help me accept its fate with Christmas feeling. 

AO2 



THE LESSON FOR TODAY 

If this uncertain age in which we dwell 
Were really as dark as I hear sages tell, 
And I convinced that they were really sages, 
I should not curse myself with it to hell, 
But leaving not the chair I long have sat in, 
I should betake me back ten thousand pages 
To the world's undebatably dark ages, 
And getting up my mediaeval Latin, 
Seek converse common cause and brotherhood 
(By all that's liberalI should, I should) 
With poets who could calmly take the fate 
Of being born at once too early and late, 
And for these reasons kept from being great. 
Yet singing but Dione in the wood 
And uer aspergit terramfloribus 
They slowly led old Latin verse to rhyme 
And to forget the ancient lengths of time, 
And so began the modern world for us. 

Td say, O Master of the Palace School, 

You were not Charles' nor anybody's fool: 

Tell me as pedagogue to pedagogue* 

You did not know that since King Charles did rule 

You had no chance but to be minor, did you? 

Your light was spent perhaps as in a fog 

That at once kept you burning low and hid you. 

The age may very well have been to blame 

For your not having won to Virgil's fame. 

403 



But no one ever heard you make the claim. 

You would not think you knew enough to judge 

The age when full upon you. That's my point. 

We have to-day and I could call their name 

Who know exactly what is out of joint 

To make their verse and their excuses lame. 

They've tried to grasp with too much social fact 

Too large a situation. You and I 

Would be afraid if we should comprehend 

And get outside of too much bad statistics 

Our muscles never could again contract: 

We never could recover human shape, 

But must live lives out mentally agape, 

Or die of philosophical distension. 

That's how we feel and we're no special mystics. 

We can't appraise the time in which we act. 
But for the folly of it, let's pretend 
We know enough to know it for adverse. 
One more millennium's about to end. 
Let's celebrate the event, my distant friend, 
In publicly disputing which is worse, 
The present age or your age. You and I 
As schoolmen of repute should qualify 
To wage a fine scholastical contention 
As to whose age deserves the lower mark, 
Or should I say the higher one, for dark. 
I can just hear the way you make it go: 
There's always something to be sorry for, 
A sordid peace or an outrageous war. 

404 



Yes, yes, of course. We have the same convention. 

The groundwork of all faith is human woe. 

It was well worth preliminary mention. 

There's nothing but injustice to be had, 

No choice is left a poet, you might add, 

But how to take the curse, tragic or comic. 

It was well worth preliminary mention. 

But let's get on to where our cases part, 

If part they do. Let me propose a start. 

(We're rivals in the badness of our case, 

Remember, and must keep a solemn face.) 

Space ails us moderns: we are sick with space, 

Its contemplation makes us out as small 

As a brief epidemic of microbes 

That in a good glass may be seen to crawl 

The patina of this the least of globes. 

But have we there the advantage after all? 

You were belittled into vilest worms 

God hardly tolerated with his feet; 

Which comes to the same thing in different terms. 

We both are the belittled human race, 

One as compared with God and one with space, 

I had thought ours the more profound disgrace; 

But doubtless this was only my conceit. 

The cloister and the observatory safnt 

Take comfort in about the same complaint. 

So science and religion really meet. 



I can just hear you call your Palace class: 
Come learn the Latin Eheu for alas. 



403 



You may not want to use it and you may. 
O paladins, the lesson for to-day 
Is how to be unhappy yet polite. 
And at the summons Roland, Olivier, 
And every sheepish paladin and peer, 
Being already more than proved in fight, 
Sits down in school to try if he can write 
Like Horace in the true Horatian vein, 
Yet like a Christian disciplined to bend 
His mind to thinking always of the end. 
Memento mori and obey the Lord. 
Art and religion love the somber chord. 
Earth's a hard place in which to save the soul, 
And could it be brought under state control, 
So automatically we all were saved, 
Its separateness from Heaven could be waive 
It might as well at once be kingdom-come. 
(Perhaps it will be next millennium.) 

But these are universals, not confined 
To any one time, place, or human kind. 
We're either nothing or a God's regret. 
As ever when philosophers are met, 
No matter where they stoutly mean to get, 
Nor what particulars they reason from, 
They are philosophers, and from old habit 
They end up in the universal Whole 
As unoriginal as any rabbit. 



406 



One age is like another for the soul. 
I'm telling you. You haven't said a thing, 
Unless I put it in your mouth to say. 
Fm having the whole argument my way 
But in your favorplease to tell your King- 
In having granted you all ages shine 
With equal darkness, yours as dark as mine. 
I'm liberal. You, you aristocrat 
Won't know exactly what I mean by that. 
I mean so altruistically moral 
I never take my own side in a quarrel. 
Fd lay my hand on his hand on his staff, 
Lean back and have my confidential laugh, 
And tell him I had read his Epitaph. 

It sent me to the graves the other day. 

The only other there was far away 

Across the landscape with a watering pot 

At his devotions in a special plot. 

And he was there resuscitating flowers 

(Make no mistake about its being bones); 

But I was only there to read the stones 

To see what on the whole they had to say 

About how long a man may think to live, 

Which is becoming my concern of fete. 

And very wide the choice they seemed to give; 

The ages ranging all the way from hours 

To months and years and many many years. 

One man had lived one hundred years and eight. 

But though we all may be inclined to wait 

407 



And follow some development of state, 

Or see what comes of science and invention, 

There is a limit to our time extension. 

We all are doomed to broken-off careers, 

And so's the nation, so's the total race. 

The earth itself is liable to the fate 

Of meaninglessly being broken off. 

(And hence so many literary tears 

At which my inclination is to scoff. ) 

I may have wept that any should have died 

Or missed their chance, or not have been their best, 

Or been their riches, fame, or love denied; 

On me as much as any is the jest. 

I take my incompleteness with the rest. 

God bless himself can no one else be blessed. 

I hold your doctrine of Memento Mori. 
And were an epitaph to be my story 
I'd have a short one ready for my own. 
I would have written of me on my stone: 
I had a lovers quarrel with the world. 



408 



TIME OUT 

It took that pause to make him realize 

The mountain he was climbing had the slant 

As of a book held up before his eyes 

(And was a text albeit done in plant). 

Dwarf cornel, gold-thread, and maianthemum, 

He following fingered as he read, 

The flowers fading on the seed to come; 

But the thing was the slope it gave his head: 

The same for reading as it was for thought, 

So different from the hard and level stare 

Of enemies defied and battles fought. 

It was the obstinately gentle air 

That may be clamored at by cause and sec*. 

But it will have its moment to reflect. 



409 



TO A MOTH SEEN IN WINTER 

Here's first a gloveless hand warm from my pocket, 
A perch and resting place 'twixt wood and wood, 
Bright-black-eyed silvery creature, brushed with 

brown, 

The wings not folded in repose, but spread. 
(Who would you be, I wonder, by those marks 
If I had moths to friend as I have flowers?) 
And now pray tell what lured you with false hope 
To make the venture of eternity 
And seek the love of kind in winter time? 
But stay and hear me out. I surely think 
You make a labor of flight for one so airy, 
Spending yourself too much in self-support. 
Nor will you find love either nor love you. 
And what I pity in you is something human, 
The old incurable untimeliness, 
Only begetter of all ills that are. 
But go. You are right. My pity cannot help. 
Go till you wet your pinions and are quenched. 
You must be made more simply wise than I 
To know the hand I stretch impulsively 
Across the gulf of well nigh everything 
May reach to you, but cannot touch your fate. 
I cannot touch your life, much less can save, 
Who am tasked to save my own a little while. 

CIRCA 1900 
410 



A CONSIDERABLE SPECK 
(MICROSCOPIC) 

A speck that would have been beneath my sight 

On any but a paper sheet so white 

Set off across what I had written there. 

And I had idly poised my pen in air 

To stop it with a period of ink 

When something strange about it made me think, 

This was no dust speck by my breathing blown, 

But unmistakably a living mite 

With inclinations it could call its own. 

It paused as with suspicion of my pen, 

And then came racing wildly on again 

To where my manuscript was not yet dry; 

Then paused again and either drank or smelt 

"With loathing, for again it turned to fly. 

Plainly with an intelligence I dealt. 

It seemed too tiny to have room for feet, 

Yet must have had a set of them complete 

To express how much it didn't want to die. 

It ran with terror and with cunning crept. 

It faltered: I could see it hesitate; 

Then in the middle of the open sheet 

Cower down in desperation to accept 

Whatever I accorded it of fate. 

I have none of the tenderer-than-thou 

Collectivistic regimenting love 

With which the modern world is being swept. 

411 



But this poor microscopic item now! 
Since it was nothing I knew evil of 
I let it lie there till I hope it slept. 

I have a mind myself and recognize 
Mind when I meet with it in any guise. 
No one can know how glad I am to find 
On any sheet the least display of mind. 



412 



THE LOST FOLLOWER 

As I have known them passionate and fine 
The gold for which they leave the golden line 
Of lyric is a golden light divine, 
Never the gold of darkness from a mine. 

The spirit plays us strange religious pranks 
To whatsoever god we owe the thanks. 
No one has ever failed the poet ranks 
To link a chain of money-metal banks. 

The loss to song, the danger of defection 
Is always in the opposite direction. 
Some turn in sheer, in Shelleyan dejection 
To try if one more popular election 

Will give us by short cut the final stage 

That poetry with all its golden rage 

For beauty on the illuminated page 

Has failed to bring I mean the Golden Age. 

And if this may not be (and nothing's sure), 
At least to live ungolden with the poor, 
Enduring what the ungolden must endure. 
This has been poetry's great anti-lure. 

The muse mourns one who went to his retreat 
Long since in some abysmal city street, 

413 



The bride who shared the crust he broke to eat 
As grave as he about the world's defeat. 

With such it has proved dangerous as friend 
Even in a playful moment to contend 
That the millennium to which you bend 
In longing is not at a progress-end 

By grace of state-manipulated pelf, 
Or politics of Ghibelline or Guelph, 
But right beside you book-like on a shelf, 
Or even better god-like in yourself. 

He trusts my love too well to deign reply. 
But there is in the sadness of his eye, 
Something about a kingdom in the sky 
(As yet unbrought to earth) he means to try. 



414 



NOVEMBER 

\Ve saw leaves go to glory, 
Then almost migratory 
Go part way down the lane, 
And then to end the story 
Get beaten down and pasted 
In one wild day of rain. 
We heard " 'Tis over" roaring. 
A year of leaves was wasted. 
Oh, we make a boast of storing, 
Of saving and of keeping, 
But only by ignoring 
The waste of moments sleeping, 
The waste of pleasure weeping, 
By denying and ignoring 
The waste of nations warring. 

1938 



415 



THE RABBIT HUNTER 

(Careless and still 
The hunter lurks 
With gun depressed, 
Facing alone 
The alder swamp? 
Ghastly snow-white. 
And his hound works 
In the ofiing there 
Like one possessed, 
And yelps delight 
And sings and romps, 
Bringing him on 
The shadowy hare 
For him to rend 
And deal a death 
That he nor it 
(Nor I) have wit 
To comprehend. 



4*6 



A LOOSE MOUNTAIN 
(TELESCOPIC) 

JDid you stay up last night (the Magi did) 

To see the star shower known as Leonid 

That once a year by hand or apparatus 

Is so mysteriously pelted at us? 

It is but fiery puffs of dust and pebbles, 

No doubt directed at our heads as rebels 

In having taken artificial light 

Against the ancient sovereignty of night. 

A fusillade of blanks and empty flashes, 

It never reaches earth except as ashes 

Of which you feel no least touch on your face 

Nor find in dew the slightest cloudy trace. 

Nevertheless it constitutes a hint 

That the loose mountain lately seen to glint 

In sunlight near us in momentous swing 

Is something in a Balearic sling 

The heartless and enormous Outer Black 

Is still withholding in the Zodiac 

But from irresolution in his back 

About when best to have us in our orbit, 

So we won't simply take it and absorb it. 



417 



IT IS ALMOST THE YEAR 
TWO THOUSAND 

To start the world of old 
We had one age of gold 
Not labored out of mines, 
And some say there are signs 
The second such has come, 
The true Millennium, 
The final golden glow 
To end it. And if so 
(And science ought to know) 
We well may raise our heads 
From weeding garden beds 
And annotating books 
To watch this end de luxe. 



418 



ON OUR SYMPATHY WITH 
THE UNDER DOG 

Jrirst under up and then again down under, 

We watch a circus of revolving dogs 

No senator dares in to kick asunder 

Lest both should bite him in the toga-togs. 



419 



A QUESTION 

A voice said. Look me in the stars 
And tell me truly, men of earth, 
If all the soul-and-body scars 
Were not too much to pay for birth. 



42O 



BOEOTIAN 

I love to toy with the Platonic notion 
That wisdom need not be of Athens Attic, 
But well may be Laconic., even Boeotian. 
At least I will not have it systematic. 



421 



THE SECRET SITS 

\Ve dance round in a ring and suppose, 
But the Secret sits in the middle and knows. 



422 



A SEMI-REVOLUTION 

1 advocate a semi-revolution. 

The trouble with a total revolution 

(Ask any reputable Rosicrucian) 

Is that it brings the same class up on top. 

Executives of skillful execution 

Will therefore plan to go half-way and stop. 

Yes, revolutions are the only salves, 

But they're one thing that should be done by halves 



423 



ASSURANCE 

The danger not an inch outside 
Behind the porthole's slab of glass 
And double ring of fitted brass 
L trust feels properly defied. 



4/24 



AN ANSWER 



But Islands of the Blessed, bless you son, 
I never came upon a blessed one. 



425 



TRESPASS 

INO, I had set no prohibiting sign, 
And yes, my land was hardly fenced. 
Nevertheless the land was mine: 
I was being trespassed on and against. 

Whoever the surly freedom took 
Of such an unaccountable stay 
Busying by my woods and brook 
Gave me strangely restless day. 

He might be opening leaves of stone., 
The picture-book of the trilobite, 
For which the region round was known,, 
And in which there was little property right. 

'Twas not the value I stood to lose 
In specimen crab in specimen rock, 
But his ignoring what was whose 
That made me look again at the clock. 

Then came his little acknowledgment: 
He asked for a drink at the kitchen door, 
An errand he may have had to invent, 
But it made my property mine once more. 



426 



A NATURE NOTE 

Jr our or five whippoorwills 

Have come down from their native ledge 

To the open country edge 

To give us a piece of their bills. 

Two in June were a pair 
You'd say sufficiently loud, 
But this was a family crowd, 
A full-fledged family affair. 

All out of time pell-mell! 
I wasn't in on the joke 
Unless it was coming to folk 
To bid us a mock farewell. 

I took note of when it occurred, 
The twenty-third of September, 
Their latest that I remember, 
September the twenty-third. 



427 



OF THE STONES OF THE PLACE 

1 farm a pasture where the boulders lie 
As touching as a basket full of eggs. 
And though they're nothing anybody begs, 
I wonder if it wouldn't signify 

For me to send you one out where you live 
In wind-soil to a depth of thirty feet, 
And every acre good enough to eat, 
As fine as flour put through a baker's sieve. 

I'd ship a smooth one you could slap and chafe, 

And set up like a statue in your yard, 

An eolith palladium to guard 

The West and keep the old tradition safe. 

Carve nothing on it. You can simply say 
In self-defense to quizzical inquiry: 
"The portrait of the soul of my gransir Ira. 
It came from where he came from anyway." 



A SERIOUS STEP LIGHTLY TAKEN 

Between two burrs on the map 

Was a hollow-headed snake. 

The burrs were hills, the snake was a stream, 

And the hollow head was a lake. 

And the dot in front of a name 

Was what should be a town. 

And there might be a house we could buy 

For only a dollar down. 

With two wheels low in the ditch 

We left our boiling car, 

And knocked at the door of a house we found, 

And there to-day we are. 

It is turning three hundred years 
On our cisatlantic shore 
For family after family name. 
We'll make it three hundred more 

For our name farming here, 
Aloof yet not aloof, 
Enriching soil and increasing stock, 
Repairing fence and roof; 



429 



A hundred thousand days 
Of front-page paper events, 
A half a dozen major wars, 
And forty-five presidents. 



430 



THE LITERATE FARMER AND THE 
PLANET VENUS 

A Dated Popular-Science Medley 
on a Mysterious Light Recently Observed in the 
Sky at Evening 



JVly unexpected knocking at the door 

Started chairs thundering on the kitchen floor, 

Knives and forks ringing on the supper plates, 

Voices conflicting like the candidates. 

A mighty farmer flung the house door wide, 

He and a lot of children came outside, 

And there on an equality we stood. 

That's the time knocking at a door did good. 

"I stopped to compliment you on this star 
You get the beauty of from where you are. 
To see it so, the bright and only one 
In sunset light, you'd think it was the sun 
That hadn't sunk the way it should have sunk, 
But right in heaven was slowly being shrunk 
So small as to be virtually gone, 
Yet there to watch the darkness coming on 
Like someone dead permitted to exist 
Enough to see if he was greatly missed. 
I didn't see the sun set. Did it set? 
Will anybody swear that isn't it? 
And will you give me shelter for the night? 
If not, a glass of rnilk will be all right. " 

431 



4 'Traveler, I'm glad you asked about that light. 
Your mind mistrusted there was something wrong, 
And naturally you couldn't go along 
Without inquiring if 'twas serious. 
'Twas providential you applied to us, 
Who were just on the subject when you came. 
There is a star that's Serious by name 
And nature too, but this is not the same. 
This light's been going on for several years, 
Although at times we think it disappears. 
You'll hear all sorts of things. You'll meet with them 
Will tell you it's the star of Bethlehem 
Above some more religion in a manger. 
But put that down to superstition, Stranger. 
What's a star doing big as a baseball? 
Between us two it's not a star at all. 
It's a new patented electric light, 
Put up on trial by that Jerseyite 
So much is being now expected of, 
To give developments the final shove 
And turn us into the next specie folks 
Are going to be, unless these monkey jokes 
Of the last fifty years are all a libel, 
And Darwin's proved mistaken, not the Bible. 
I s'pose you have your notions on the vexed 
Question of what we're turning into next." 

"As liberals we're willing to give place 
To any demonstrably better race, 
No matter what the color of its skin. 

432 



(But what a human race the white has been!) 

I heard a fellow in a public lecture 

On Pueblo Indians and their architecture 

Declare that if such Indians inherited 

The condemned world the legacy was merited. 

So far as he, the speaker, was concerned 

He had his ticket bought, his passage earned, 

To take the Mayflower back where he belonged 

Before the Indian race was further wronged. 

But come, enlightened as in talk you seem, 

You don't believe that that first-water gleam 

Is not a star?" 

''Believe it? Why, I know it. 
Its actions any cloudless night will show it. 
You'll see it be allowed up just so high, 
Say about halfway up the western sky, 
And then get slowly, slowly pulled back down. 

You might not notice if you've lived in town, 

As I suspect you have. A town debars 

Much notice of what's going on in stars. 

The idea is no doubt to make one job 

Of lighting the whole night with one big blob 

Of electricity in bulk the way 

The sun sets the example in the day." 

"Here come more stars to character the skies, 
And they in the estimation of the wise 
Are more divine than any bulb or arc, 

433 



Because their purpose is to flash and spark. 
But not to take away the precious dark. 
We need the interruption of the night 
To ease attention off when overtight, 
To break our logic in too long a flight, 
And ask us if our premises are right." 

"Sick talk, sick talk, sick sentimental talk! 
It doesn't do you any good to walk. 
I see what you are: can't get you excited 
With hopes of getting mankind unbenighted. 
Some ignorance takes rank as innocence. 
Have it for all of me and have it dense. 
The slave will never thank his manumitter; 
Which often makes the manumitter bitter.'' 

u ln short, you think that star a patent medicine 
Put up to cure the world by Mr. Edison." 

"You said it that's exactly what it is. 
My son in Jersey says a friend of his 
Knows the old man and nobody's so deep 
In incandescent lamps and ending sleep. 
The old man argues science cheapened speed. 
A good cheap anti-dark is now the need. 
Give us a good cheap twenty-four-hour day, 
No part of which we'd have to waste, I say, 
And who knows where we can't get! Wasting time 
In sleep or slowness is the deadly crime. 
He gave up sleep himself some time ago, 

434 



It puffs the face and brutalizes so. 
You take the ugliness all so much dread, 
Called getting out of the wrong side of bed. 
That is the source perhaps of human hate, 
And well may be where wars originate. 
Get rid of that and there' d be left no great 
Of either murder or war in any land. 
You know how cunningly mankind is planned: 
We have one loving and one hating hand. 
The loving's made to hold each other like, 
While with the hating other hand we strike. 
The blow can be no stronger than the clutch, 
Or soon we'd bat each other out of touch, 
And the fray wouldn't last a single round. 
And still it's bad enough co badly wound, 
And if our getting up to start the day 
On the right side of bed would end the fray, 
We'd hail the remedy. But it's been tried 
And found, he says, a bed has no right side. 
The trouble is, with that receipt for love, 
A bed's got no right side to get out of. 
We can't be trusted to the sleep we take, 
And simply must evolve to stay awake. 
He thinks that chairs and tables will endure, 
But beds in less than fifty years he's sure 
There will be no such piece of furniture. 
He's surely got it in for cots and beds. 
No need for us to rack our common heads 
About it, though. We haven't got the mind. 
It best be left to great men of his kind 

435 



Who have no other object than our good. 

There's a lot yet that isn't understood. 

Ain't it a caution to us not to fix 

No limits to what rose in rubbing sticks 

On fire to scare away the pterodix 

When man first lived in caves along the creeks? " 

"Marvelous world in nineteen- twenty-six. " 



INDEX OF 
FIRST LINES 



A bird half wakened in the lunar noon 350 

A boy, presuming on his intellect 335 

A breeze discovered my open book 396 

A governor it was proclaimed this time 87 

A head thrusts in as for the view 386 

A lantern light from deeper in the barn 107 

A plow, they say, to plow the snow 255 

A saturated meadow 15 

A scent of ripeness from ever a wall 351 
A speck that would have been beneath my sight 411 

A Stranger came to the door at eve 8 

A tree's leaves may be ever so good 341 

A voice said, Look me in the stars 420 

A winter garden in an alder swamp 278 

Age saw two quiet children 390 

All crying 'We will go with you, O Wind' 254 

All out of doors looked darkly in at him 121 

Always -I tell you this they learn^l 137 

Always the same, when on a fated night 241 

An ant on the table cloth 330 

As gay for you to take your father's axe 402 

As I came to the edge of the woods 388 

437 



As I have known them passionate and fine 413 

As I went out a Crow 146 

As vain to raise a voice as a sigh 268 

Before man came to blow it right 237 

Between two burrs on the map 429 
Blood has been harder to dam back than water 279 

Brown lived at such a lofty farm 149 

Builder, in building the little house 250 

But Islands of the Blessed, bless you son 425 
By June our brook's run out of song and speed 124 

Careless and still 416 

Come with rain O loud Southwester 12 

Did you stay up last night (the Magi did) 417 

Dust always blowing about the town 270 

First under up and then again down under 419 

Four or five whippoorwills 427 

Tred, where is north 1 284 

Grief may have thought it was grief 343 

Having a wheel and four legs of its own 208 

He gave the solid rail a hateful kick 305 

He has dust in his eyes and a fan for a wing 357 

He is said to have been the last Red Man 156 

He is that fallen lance that lies as hurled 290 

He saw her from the bottom of the stairs 59 

He thought he kept the universe alone 393 

He would declare and could himself believe 394 

Here come real stars to fill the upper skies 265 

Here come the line-gang pioneering by 1 55 

438 



Here further up the mountain slope 297 
Here's first a gloveless hand warm from my 

pocket 410 

How countlessly they congregate 10 

I advocate a semi-revolution 423 

I came an errand one cloud-blowing evening 197 

I didn't like the way he went away 1 38 

I didn't make you know how glad I was 74 

I dwell in a lonely house I know 5 

I farm a pasture where the boulders lie 428 

I felt the chill of the meadow underfoot 397 

I found a dimpled spider, fat and white 349 

I had for my winter evening walk 114 

I have been one acquainted with the night 280 
I have been treading on leaves all day until I 

am autumn-tired 342 

I have wished a bird would fly away 274 

I left you in the morning 14 

I let myself in at the kitchen door 97 

I love to toy with the Platonic notion 42 1 

I met a lady from the South who said 179 

I never dared be radical when young 356 

I often see flowers from a passing car 269 

I said to myself, almost in prayer * 353 

I slumbered with your poems on my breast 234 

I staid the night for shelter at a farm 221 

I stay 228 

I stole forth dimly in the dripping pause 346 

439 



i turned to speak to God 357 

I walked down alone Sunday after church 130 

I went to turn the grass once after one 24 

I wonder about the trees 1 75 

If, as they say, some dust thrown in my eyes 298 

If neaven were to do again 277 

If this uncertain age in which we dwell 403 

If tired of trees I seek again mankind 19 

Fm going out to clean the pasture spring 3 

In a Vermont bedroom closet 337 

It is blue-butterfly day here in spring 240 

It is getting dark and time he drew to a house 395 

It is late at night and still I am losing 358 

It snowed in spring on earth so dry and warm 257 

It took that pause to make him realize . 409 
It was far in the sameness of the wood , 27 

It was too lonely for her there 139 

I've known ere now an interfering branch 204 

I've tried the new moon tilted in the air 264 

Lancaster bore him such a little town 50 

Let chaos storm 357 

Let me be the one 356 

Let the downpour roil and toil 326 

Love and forgetting might have carried them 246 

Love at the lips was touch 242 

Love has earth to which she clings 126 

Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table 37 

More than half way up the pass 294 

440 



My long two-pointed ladder's sticking through 

a tree 80 

My Sorrow, when she's here with me 7 

My unexpected knocking at the door 43 1 

Nature's first green is gold 235 

Never tell me that not one star of all 194 

Never ask of money spent 357 

No, I had set no prohibiting sign 426 

No ship of all that under sailor or steam 291 

No speed of wind or water rushing by 345 

O hushed October morning mild 30 

Oh, give us pleasure in the flowers today 1 3 

Oh, let's go up the hill and scare ourselves 141 

Oh, stormy stormy world 387 

On glossy wires artistically bent 357 
Once on the kind of day called 'weather 

breeder' 133 
Once when the snow of the year was begin- 
ning to fall 236 
One misty evening, one another's guide 365 
One of my wishes is that those dark trees 4 
One ought not to have to care 1 37 
One thing has a shelving bank 321 
Others taunt me with having kjielt at well- 
curbs 239 
Out of the mud two strangers came 312 
Out through the fields and the woods 3 1 
Out walking in the frozen swamp one grey day 112 

441 



Over back where they speak of life as staying 295 
Sea waves are green and wet 288 
She had no saying dark enough 1 38 
She is as in a field a silken tent 385 
Snow falling and night falling fast oh fast 340 
Some of you will be glad I did what I did 354 
Some one in ancient Mas d' Azii 378 
Some say the world will end in fire 232 
Some things are never clear 34^ 
Something I saw or thought I saw 33 2 
Something inspires the only cow of late 1 34 
Something there is that doesn't love a wall 35 
Spades take up leaves 252 
Square Matthew Hale's young grafted apple- 
tree 323 
Such a fine pullet ought to go 318 
That far-off day the leaves in flight 391 
The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strung 1 36 
The bear puts both arms around the tree 

above her 303 

The bearer of evil tidings 363 

The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yard 147 

The city had withdrawn into itself 1 18 
The clouds, the source of rain, one stormy 

night 339 

The danger not an inch outside 424 
The farm house lingers, though averse to 

square 249 

442 



The fisherman's swapping a yarn for a yarn 293 

The grade surmounted, we were riding high 334 

The great Overdog 289 

The heart can think of no devotion 267 

The house had gone to bring again 259 

The Infinite's being so wide 400 

The land was ours before we were the land's 399 

The line-storm clouds fly tattered and swift 28 
The little old house was out with a little new 

shed 328 

The mountain held the town as in a shadow 45 
The old dog barks backward without getting 

up 356 

The people along the sand 347 

The rain to the wind said 273 

The shattered water made a misty din 272 

The soil now gets a rumpling soft and damp 344 

The surest thing there is is we are riders 301 

The swinging mill bell changed its rate 300 

The three stood listening to a fresh access 1 58 

The tree the tempest with a crash of wood 256 

The Voice said, 'Hurl her down' 28 1 

The way a crow 233 

The well was dry beside the door 2 1 

The west was getting out of gofd 25 1 

The white- tailed hornet lives in a balloon 315 

The witch that came (the withered hag) 355 

There is a singer everyone has heard 125 

443 



There overtook me and drew me in 153 
There was never a sound beside the wood but 

one 2O 
There were three in the meadow by the brook 82 
There's a place called Far-away Mgadow 296 
These pools that, though in forests, still reflect 263 
They leave us so to the way we took 18 
They sent him back to her. The letter came 248 
This biplane is the shape of human flight 356 
This saying good-bye on the edge of the dark 244 
To drive Paul out of any lumber camp 211 
To start the world of old 418 
To Time it never seems that he is brave 389 
Tree at my window, window tree 276 
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood 1 17 
Was there ever a cause too lost 292 
We asked for rain. It didn't flash and roar 401 
We chanced in passing by that afternoon 64 
We dance round in a ring and suppose 422 
We make ourselves a place apart 23 
We saw leaves go to glory 415 
We sit indoors and talk of the cold outside 352 
What things for dream there are when spectre- 
like 16 
What tree may not the fig be gathered from 217 
When a friend calls to me from the road 133 
When I see birches bend to left and right 127 
When I spread out my hand here today 299 

444 



When I was just; as far as I could walk 1 23 

When I was young my teachers were the old 300 
When the spent sun throws up its rays on 

cloud 271 

When the wind works against us in the dark 1 1 

Where had I heard this wind before 275 

Where my imaginary line 383 

Whose woods these are I think I know 238 

Why make so much of fragmentary blue 23 J 

Why Tityrus! But you've forgotten me 367 

Will the blight end the chestnut 356 

Winds blow the open grassy places bleak 266 

You come to fetch me from my work to-night 132 

You know Orion always comes up sideways 200 

You like to hear about gold 359 

You ought to have seen what I saw on my way 69 
You'll wait a long, long time for anything 








CHICAGO 

Hog Butcher for the World, 

Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat, 

Player with Railroads and the Nation’s Freight Handler, 

Stormy, husky, brawling, 

City of the Big Shoulders 

They tell me you are wicked and I believe them, for I have seen your 
painted women under the gas lamps luring the farm boys 
And they tell me you are crooked and I answer Yes, it is true I have seen 
the gunman kill and go free to kill again 
And they tell me you are brutal and my reply is On the faces of women 
and children I have seen the marks of wanton hunger. 

And having answered so I turn once more to those who sneer at this my 
city, and I give them back the sneer and say to them 
Come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be 
alive and coarse and strong and cunning. 

Flinging magnetic curses amid the toil of piling job on job, here is a tall 
bold slugger set vivid against the little soft cities, 

Fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action, cunning as a savage pitted 
against the wilderness, 

Bareheaded, 

Shoveling, 

Wrecking, 

Planning, 

Building, breaking, rebuilding. 

Under the smoke, dust all over his mouth, laughing with white teeth. 
Under the terrible burden of destiny laughing as a young man laughs. 
Laughing even as an ignorant fighter laughs who has never lost a battle, 

3 




4 


  


Bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse, and under his ribs 
the heart of the people. 

Laughing' 

Laughing the stormy, husky, brawling laughter ot Youth, half-naked, 
sweating, proud to be Hog Butcher, Tool Maker, Stacker of \^^heat, 
Player with Railroads and Freight Handler to the Nation 


SKETCH 

The shadows of the ships 

Rock on the crest 

In the low blue lustre 

Of the tardy and the soft inrolling tide 

A long brown bar at the dip of the sky 
Puts an arm of sand in the span of salt 

The lucid and endless wrinkles 
Draw in, lapse and withdraw 
Wavelets crumble and white spent bubbles 
Wash on the floor of the beach 

Rocking on the crest 
In the low blue lustre 
Are the shadows of the ships 


MASSES 

Among the mountains I wandered and saw blue haze and red crag and 
was amazed, 

On the beach where the long push under the endless tide maneuvers, I 
stood silent, 

Under the stars on the prame watching the Dipper slant over the horizon’s 
grass, I was full of thoughts 

Great men, pageants of war and labor, soldiers and workers, mothers lifting 
their children these all I touched, and felt the solemn thrill of them 

And then one day I got a true look at the Poor, millions of the Poor, 


CHICAGO POEMS 


patient and toiling, more patient than crags, tides, and stars, innumer- 
able, patient as the darkness of night— and all broken, humble rums 
of nations 


LOST 

Desolate and lone 
All night long on the lake 
Where fog trails and mist creeps. 
The whistle of a boat 
Calls and cries unendingly. 

Like some lost child 
In tears and trouble 
Hunting the harbor's breast 
And the harbor's eyes 


THE HARBOR 

Passing through huddled and ugly walls 
By doorways where women 
Looked from their hunger-deep eyes. 
Haunted with shadows of hunger-hands. 
Out from the huddled and ugly walls, 

I came sudden, at the city's edge, 

On a blue burst of lake. 

Long lake waves breaking under the sun 
On a spray-flung curve of shore. 

And a fluttering storm of gulls, 

Masses of great gray wings 

And flying white bellies 

Veering and wheeling free in the open. 


THEY WILL SAY 

Of my city the worst that men will ever say is this 
You took little children away from the sun and the dew, 

And the glimmers that played in the grass under the great sky, 
And the reckless ram, you put them between walls 




6 


  


To work, broken and smothered, for bread and wages. 
To eat dust m their throats and die empty-hearted 
For a little handful of pay on a few Saturday nights 


MILL-DOORS 
You never come back 

I say good-by when I see you going in the doors. 
The hopeless open doors that call and wait 
And take you then for— -how many cents a day? 
How many cents for the sleepy eyes and fingers? 

I say good-by because I know they tap your wnsts. 
In the dark, in the silence, day by day. 

And all the blood of you drop by drop, 

And you are old before you are young 
You never come back 


HALSTED STREET CAR 

Come you, cartoonists. 

Hang on a strap with me here 
At seven o’clock m the morning 
On a Halsted street car 

Take your pencils 
And draw these faces 

Try with your pencils for these crooked faces, 
That pig-sticker in one comer— his mouth— 
That overall factory girl— her loose cheeks 

Find for your pencils 
A way to mark your memory 
Of bred empty faces 

After their night’s sleep. 

In the moist dawn 


CHICAGO POEMS 


7 


And cool daybreak, 
Faces 

Tired of wishes, 
Empty of dreams 


CLARK STREET BRIDGE 

Dust of the feet 
And dust of the wheels. 

Wagons and people going, 

All day feet and wheels. 

Now . . 

Only stars and mist 
A lonely policeman. 

Two cabaret dancers. 

Stars and mist again. 

No more feet or wheels. 

No more dust and wagons. 

Voices of dollars 
And drops of blood 

Voices of broken hearts, 

. . . Voices singing, singing, 
. . Silver voices, singing. 
Softer than the stars. 

Softer than the mist 


PASSERS-BY 

Passers-by, 

Out of your many faces 
Flash memories to me 
Now at the day end 
Away from the sidewalks 
Where your shoe soles traveled 
And your voices rose and blent 




8 


  


To form the city’s afternoon roar 
Hindering an old silence 

Passers-by, 

I remember lean ones among you. 
Throats in the clutch of a hope. 
Lips wntten over with strivings. 
Mouths that kiss only for love, 
Records of great wishes slept with. 
Held long 

And prayed and toiled for 
Yes, 

Written on 
Your mouths 
And your throats 
I read them 
When you passed by 


THE WALKING MAN OF RODIN 

Legs hold a torso away from the earth 
And a regular high poem of legs is here 
Powers of bone and cord raise a belly and lungs 
Out of ooze and over the loam where eves look and ears hear 
And arms have a chance to hammer and shoot and run motors 
You make us 
Proud of our legs, old man 

And you left off the head here. 

The skull found always cmmbhng neighbor of the ankles 


SUBWAY 

Down between the walls of shadow 
Where the iron laws insist. 

The hunger voices mock 


CHICAGO POEMS 


9 


The worn wayfanng men 
With the hunched and humble shoulders. 
Throw their laughter into toil 


THE SHOVEL MAN 


On the street 

Slung on his shoulder is a handle half way across. 

Tied in a big knot on the scoop of cast iron 

Are the overalls faded from sun and ram in the ditches; 

Spatter of dry clay sticking yellow on his left sleeve 
And a flimsy shirt open at the throat, 

I know him for a shovel man, 

A dago working for a dollar six bits a day 
And a dark-eyed woman m the old country dreams of him for one of the 
world’s ready men with a pair of fresh lips and a kiss better than 
all the wild grapes that ever grew in Tuscany 


A TEAMSTER’S FAREWELL 
Sobs En Route to a Penitentiary 

Good-by now to the streets and the clash of wheels and locking hubs. 
The sun coming on the brass buckles and harness knobs. 

The muscles of the horses sliding under their heavy haunches, 
Good-by now to the traffic policeman and his whistle. 

The smash of the iron hoof on the stones. 

All the crazy wonderful slamming roar of the street— 

O God, there’s noises Fm going to be hungry for. 


FISH GRIER 

I KNOW a Jew fish cner down on Maxwell Street with a voice like a north 
wind blowing over com stubble in January 
He dangles hemng before prospective customers evincing a ]oy identical 
with that of Pavlowa dancing 


10 


  


His face is that of a man tembly glad to be selling fish, terribly glad that 
God made fish, and customers to whom he may call his wares from 
a pushcart 

PICNIC BOAT 

Sunday night and the park policemen tell each other it is dark as a 
stack of black cats on Lake Michigan 

A big picnic boat comes home to Chicago from the peach farms of 
Saugatuck 

Hundreds of electric bulbs break the night’s darkness, a flock of red and 
yellow birds with wings at a standstill. 

Running along the deck-railings are festoons and leaping in curves are 
loops of light from prow and stem to the tall smokestacks 

Over the hoarse crunch of waves at my pier comes a hoarse answer in 
the rhythmic oompa of the brasses playing a Polish folk-song for the 
home-comers 


‘ HAPPINESS 

I ASKED professors who teach the meaning of life to tell me what is hap- 
piness 

And I went to famous executives who boss the work of thousands of men 

They all shook their heads and gave me a smile as though I was trying 
to fool with them 

And then one Sunday afternoon I wandered out along the Desplames 
nver 

And I saw a crowd of Hunganans under the trees with their women and 
children and a keg of beer and an accordion 


MUCKERS 

Twenty men stand watching the muckers 
Stabbing the sides of the ditch 
Where clay gleams yellow, 

Dnving the blades of their shovels 
Deeper and deeper for the new gas mams, 
Wiping sweat off their faces 
With red bandanas. 


CHICAGO POEMS 


11 


The muckers work on pausing to pull 
Their boots out of suckholes where they slosh 

Of the twenty looking on 
Ten murmur, "'O, it's a hell of a job,” 

Ten others, “J^sus, I wish I had the job " 


BLACKLISTED 

Why shall I keep the old name^ 

What is a name anywhere anyway? 

A name is a cheap thing all fathers and mothers leave each child 
A job IS a job and I want to live, so 

Wliy does God Almighty or anybody else care whether I take a new 
name to go by? 


GRACELAND 


Tomb of a millionaire, 

A multi-millionaire, ladies and gentlemen. 

Place of the dead where they spend every year 
The usury of twenty-five thousand dollars 
For upkeep and flowers 
To keep fresh the memory of the dead 
The merchant prince gone to dust 
Commanded in his written will 
Over the signed name of his last testament 
Twenty-five thousand dollars be set aside 
For roses, lilacs, hydrangeas, tulips. 

For perfume and color, sweetness of remembrance 
Around his last long home. 

(A hundred cash girls want nickels to go to the movies tonight 
In the back stalls of a hundred saloons, women are at tables 
Drinking with men or waiting for men jingling loose silver dollars in 
their pockets 

In a hundred furnished rooms is a girl who sells silk or dress goods or 
leather stuff for six dollars a week wages 




12 


  


And when she pulls on her stockings in the morning she is reckless 
about God and the newspapers and the police, the talk of her home 
town or the name people call her ) 


CHILD OF THE ROMANS 

The dago shovelman sits by the railioacl track 
Eating a noon meal of bread and bologna 

A train whirls bv, and men and women at tables 
Alive with red roses and yellow jonquils, 

Eat steaks running with brown gravy, 

Strawberries and cream, eclairs and coffee 
The dago shovelman finishes the drv bread and bologna. 
Washes it down w'lth a dipper from the watcr-bo\, 

And goes back to the second half of a ten-hour das s work 
Keeping the road-bed so the roses and jonquils 
Shake hardly at all in the cut glass sases 
Standing slender on the tables in the dining cars 


THE RIGHT TO GRIEF 
To Certain Poets About to Die 

Take your fill of intimate remorse, perfumed sorrow. 

Over the dead child of a millionaire. 

And the pity of Death refusing any check on the bank 
Which the millionaire might order his secretary to scratch off 
And get cashed 

Very well. 

You for your grief and I for mine 

Let me have a sorrow my own if I want to 

I shall cry over the dead child of a stockyards hunky 

His job IS sweeping blood off the floor 

He gets a dollar seventy cents a day when he works 

And it’s many tubs of blood he shoves out with a broom day by day. 

Now his three year old daughter 

Is m a white coffin that cost him a week’s wages. 


CHICAGO POEMS 


^3 


Every Saturday night he will pay the undertaker fifty cents till the debt 
IS wiped out 

The hunky and his wife and the kids 
Cry over the pinched face almost at peace in the white box 
They remember it was scrawny and ran up high doctor bills 
They are glad it is gone for the rest of the family now will have more 
to eat and wear 

Yet before the majesty of Death they cry around the coffin 
And wipe their eyes with red bandanas and sob when the priest says, 
''God have mercy on us all '' 

I have a light to feel my throat choke about this 
You take your grief and I mine— see^ 

Tomorrow there is no funeral and the hunky goes back to his job sweep- 
ing blood off the floor at a dollar seventy cents a day 
All he does all day long is keep on shoving hog blood ahead of him with 
a broom 


MAG 

I WISH to God I never saw you, Mag 
I wish you never quit your job and came along with me 
I wish we never bought a license and a white dress 
For you to get married in the day we ran off to a minister 
And told him we would love each other and take care of each other 
Always and always long as the sun and the ram lasts anywhere 
Yes, Fm wishing now you lived somewhere away from here 
And I was a bum on the bumpers a thousand miles away dead broke 
I wish the kids had never come 
And rent and coal and clothes to pay for 
And a grocery man calling for cash. 

Every day cash for beans and prunes 
I wish to God I never saw you, Mag 
I wish to God the kids had never come 




COMPLEIF POL MS 


14 


ONION DAYS 

Mrs Gabrielle Giovanniiii comes along Pcorw Street e\er>' mormng 
at nine o’clock 

With kindling wood piled on top of her head, her e\es looking stiaight 
ahead to find the way for her old feet 

Her daughter-in-law, Mrs Pietro Giovannitti, whose husband was killed 
in a tunnel explosion through the negligence of a fellow -sonant, 

Works ten hours a day, sometimes twelve, picking onions for Jasper on 
the Bowmanville road 

She takes a sheet cai at half-past five in the morning, Mrs Pietro Gio- 
vannitti does. 

And gets back from Jasper’s with cash for her day’s work, between nine 
and ten o’clock at night 

Last week she got eight cents a box, Mrs Pietro Giovannitti, picking 
onions for Jaspei, 

But this week Jasper diopped the pay to six cents a box because so manj 
women and girls were answering the ads in the Dailj News 

Jasper belongs to an I'.piscopal church in Ravenswood and on certain 
Sundays 

He enjoys chanting the Nicene creed with his daughters on each side of 
him joining their voices with his 

If the preacher repeats old sermons of a Sunday, Jaspci’s mind winders to 
his 700-acre farm and how he can make it produce moic cfTiciently 

And sometimes he speculates on whether he could word an ad in the 
Daily News so it would bring more women and girls out to his farm 
and reduce operating costs 

Mrs Pietro Giovannitti is far from desperate about life, her joy is 111 a 
child she knows will amve to her m tliiee months 

And now while these are the pictures for today there are other pictures of 
the Giovannitti people I could give you for tomorrow, 

And how some of them go to the county agent on winter mornings with 
their baskets for beans and cornmeal and molasses. 

I listen to fellows saying here’s good stuff for a novel 01 it might be 
worked up into a good play 

I say there’s no dramatist living can put old Mrs Gabrielle Giovannitti 
mto a play with that kindling wood piled on top of her head coming 
along Peoria Street nine o’clock in the morning. 


CHICAGO POEMS 


^5 


POPULATION DRIFTS 

New-mown hay smell and wind of the plain made her a woman whose 
ribs had the power of the hills in them and her hands were tough 
for work and there was passion for life in her womb 
She and her man crossed the ocean and the years that marked their faces 
saw them haggling with landlords and grocers while six children 
played on the stones and prowled m the garbage cans 
One child coughed its lungs away, two more have adenoids and can 
neither talk nor run like their mother, one is in jail, two have jobs 
in a box factory 

And as they fold the pasteboard, they wonder what the wishing is and 
the wistful glory in them that flutters faintly when the glimmer of 
spring comes on the air or the green of summer turns brown 
They do not know it is the new-mown hay smell calling and the wind 
of the plain praying for them to come back and take hold of life 
again with tough hands and with passion 


CRIPPLE 

Once when I saw a cripple 

Gasping slowly his last days with the white plague, 

Looking from hollow eyes, calling for air. 

Desperately gesturing with wasted hands 

In the dark and dust of a house down in a slum, 

I said to myself 

I would rather have been a tall sunflower 
Living m a country garden 
Lifting a golden-brown face to the summer. 
Ram-washed and dew-misted. 

Mixed with the poppies and ranking hollyhocks, 
And wonderingly watching night after night 
The clear silent processionals of stars 


i6 


  


A FENCE 

Now the stone house on the lake front is finished and the workmen are 
beginning the fence 

The palings are made of iron bars with steel points that can stab the life 
out of any man who falls on them 

As a fence, it is a masterpiece, and will shut off the rabble and all vaga- 
bonds and hungry men and all wandering children looking for a 
place to play 

Passing through the bars and over the steel points will go nothing except 
Death and the Ram and Tomorrow' 


ANNA IMROTH 

Cross the hands over the breast here— so 
Straighten the legs a little more— so 
And call for the wagon to come and take her home 
Her mother will cry some and so will her sisters and brothers 
But all of the others got down and they are safe and this is the only one 
of the factory girls who wasn’t lucky in making the jump when the 
fire broke 

It IS the hand of God and the lack of fire escapes. 


WORKING GIRLS 

The working girls in the morning are going to work— long lines of them 
afoot amid the downtown stores and factories, thousands with little 
bnck-shaped lunches wrapped in newspapers under their arms 

Each morning as I move through this river of young-woman life I feel a 
wonder about where it is all going, so many with a peach bloom of 
young years on them and laughter of red lips and memories in their 
eyes of dances the night before and plays and walks. 

Green and gray streams run side by side m a river and so here arc always 
the others, those who have been over the way, the women who know 
each one the end of life’s gamble for her, the meaning and the clue, 
the how and the why of the dances and the arms that passed around 
their waists and the fingers that played m their hair. 



CHICAGO POEMS 


^7 


Faces go by written over ''I know it all, I know where the bloom and 
the laughter go and I have memories,” and the feet of these move 
slower and they have wisdom where the others have beauty 
So the green and the gray move in the early morning on the downtown 
streets 


MAMIE 

Mamie beat her head against the bars of a little Indiana town and 
dreamed of romance and big things off somewhere the way the rail- 
road trains all ran 

She could see the smoke of the engines get lost down where the streaks 
of steel flashed in the sun and when the newspapers came in on the 
morning mail she knew there was a big Chicago far off, where all 
the trains ran 

She got tired of the barber shop boys and the post ofEce chatter and the 
church gossip and the old pieces the band played on the Fourth of 
July and Decoration Day 

And sobbed at her fate and beat her head against the bars and was going 
to kill herself 

When the thought came to her that if she was going to die she might as 
well die struggling for a clutch of romance among the streets of 
Chicago 

She has a job now at six dollars a week m the basement of the Boston 
Store 

And even now she beats her head against the bars in the same old way 
and wonders if there is a bigger place the railroads run to from Chi- 
cago where maybe there is 
romance 
and big things 
and real dreams 
that never go smash 




i8 


C O M P L R 1 l POEMS 


PERSOXALIl’Y 

Musings of a Police Reporter in the Identification Bureau 

You have loved fortj' women, but \ou have nnlv one thumb 
You have led a hundred secret lives, but vou marh onlv one thumb 
You go round the world and fight in a thousand wais and win all the 
world’s honors, but when }ou come back home the piint of the one 
thumb >our mother gave vou is the same print of thumb vou had 
in the old home when your mother kissed vou and said good-bv 
Out of the whirling womb of time come millions of men and their feet 
crowd the earth and they cut one another’s throats for room to stand 
and among them all are not two thumbs alike 
Somewhere is a Great God of Thumbs who can tell the inside story of this 


CUMULATIVES 

Storms have beaten on this point of land 
And ships gone to wreck here 

and the passers-by remember it 
with talk on the deck at night 
as they near it 

Fists have beaten on the face of this old prize-fighter 
And his battles have held the sporting pages 

and on the street they indicate him with their 
right forefinger as one who once wore 
a championship belt 

A hundred stones have been published and a thousand rumored 
About why this tall dark man has divorced two beautiful young w'omen 
And married a third who resembles the first two 

and they shake their heads and say, “There he goes,” 
when he passes by in sunny weather or in rain 
along the city streets 


CHICAGO POEMS 


^9 


TO CERTAIN JOURNEYMEN 

Undertakers, hearse drivers, grave diggers, 

I speak to you as one not afraid of your business 

You handle dust going to a long country. 

You know the secret behind your job is the same whether you lower the 
coflBn with modern, automatic machinery, well-oiled and noiseless, 
or whether the body is laid in by naked hands and then covered by 
the shovels 

Your day's work is done with laughter many days of the year, 

And you earn a living by those who say good-by today in thin whispers 


CHAMFORT 

There's Chamfort He's a sample 
Locked himself in his library with a gun. 

Shot off his nose and shot out his right eye 
And this Chamfort knew how to write 
And thousands read his books on how to live. 

But he himself didn’t know 

How to die by force of his own hand— see^ 

They found him a red pool on the carpet 
Cool as an April forenoon. 

Talking and talking gay maxims and grim epigrams 
Well, he wore bandages over his nose and right eye, 
Drank coffee and chatted many years 
With men and women who loved him 
Because he laughed and daily dared Death 
'*Come and take me." 



20 


COMPLETF POEMS 


LIMITED 

I AM nding on a limited express, one of the crack trains of the nation 
Hurtling across the praine into blue haze and dark an go fifteen all-steel 
coaches holding a thousand people 

(All the coaches shall be scrap and rust and all the men and women 
laughing m the dineis and sleepers shall pass to ashes ) 

I ask a man m the smoker where he is going and he answers “Omaha ” 


THE HAS-BEEN 

A STONE face higher than six horses stood fi\e thousand rears gazing at 
the world seeming to clutch a secret 

A boy passes and throws a niggerhead that chips off the end of the nose 
from the stone face, he lets fly a mud ball that spattcis the right eye 
and chedc of the old looker-on 

The boy laughs and goes whistling “cc-cc-ce ec-ec-ec.” The stone face 
stands silent, seeming to clutch a secret 


IN A BACK ALLEY 

Remembrance for a great man is this. 

The newsies are pitching pennies 

And on the copper disk is the man’s face 

Dead lover of boys, what do you ask for now^ 


A COIN 

Your western heads here cast on money. 
You are the two that fade away togetlier. 
Partners m the mist 

Lunging buffalo shoulder. 

Lean Indian face, 

We who come after where you are gone 
Salute your forms on the new nickel. 



CHICAGO POEMS 


21 


You are 
To us 
The past 

Runners 
On the prairie 
Good-by 


DYNAMITER 

I SAT With a dynamiter at supper in a German saloon eating steak and 
onions 

And he laughed and told stories of his wife and children and the cause of 
labor and the working class 

It was laughter of an unshakable man knowing life to be a rich and red- 
blooded thing 

Yes, Ins laugh rang like the call of gray birds filled with a glory of joy 
ramming their winged flight through a ram storm 

His name was m many newspapeis as an enemy of the nation and few 
keepers of churches or schools would open their doors to him 

Over the steak and onions not a word was said of his deep days and 
nights as a dynamiter 

Only I always remember him as a lover of life, a lover of children, a lover 
of all free, reckless laughter everywhere—lover of red hearts and red 
blood the world over 


ICE HANDLER 

I KNOW an ice handler who wears a flannel shirt with pearl buttons the 
size of a dollar, 

And he lugs a hundred-pound hunk into a saloon icebox, helps himself 
to cold ham and rye bread. 

Tells the bartender it's hotter than yesterday and will be hotter yet 
tomorrow, by Jesus, 

And is on his way with his head in the air and a hard pair of fists 

He spends a dollar or so every Saturday night on a two hundred pound 
woman who washes dishes m the Hotel Morrison 

He remembers when the union was organized he broke the noses of two 


22 


  


scabs and loosened the nuts so the wheels came off six different 
wagons one morning, and he came around and watched the icc melt 
m the street 

All he was sorry for was one of the scabs bit him on the knuckles of the 
nght hand so they bled when he came around to the saloon to tell 
the boys about it 


JACK 

Jack was a swarthy, swaggering son-of-a-gun 

He worked thirty years on the railroad, ten hours a day, and his hands 
were tougher than sole leather 

He married a tough woman and they had eight children and the woman 
died and the children grew up and went away and wrote the old 
man every two years 

He died in the poorhouse sitting on a bench in the sun telling reminis- 
cences to other old men whose women were dead and children 
scattered 

There was joy on his face when he died as there was joy on his face when 
he lived— he was a swarthy, swaggering son-of-a-gun 


FELLOW CITIZENS 

I DRANK musty ale at the Illinois Athletic Club with the millionaire 
manufacturer of Green River butter one night 
And his face had the shining light of an old-time Quaker, he spoke of 
a beautiful daughter, and I knew he had a peace and a happiness 
up his sleeve somewhere 

Then I heard Jim Kirch make a speech to the Advertising Association on 
the trade resources of South Amenca 
And the way he lighted a three-for-a-mckel stogie and cocked it at an 
angle regardless of the manners of our best people, 

I knew he had a clutch on a real happiness even though some of the 
reporters on his newspaper say he is the living double of Jack 
London’s Sea Wolf. 

In the mayor's oflEce the mayor himself told me he was happy though 
it IS a hard job to satisfy all the office-seekers and eat all the dinners 
he is asked to eat. 


CHICAGO POEMS 




Down in Gilpm Place, near Hull House, was a man with his ]aw wrapped 
for a bad toothache, 

And he had it all over the butter millionaire, Jim Kirch and the mayor 
when it came to happiness 

He IS a maker of accordions and guitars and not only makes them from 
start to finish, but plays them after he makes them 
And he had a guitar of mahogany with a walnut bottom he offered for 
seven dollars and a half if I wanted it. 

And another just like it, only smaller, for six dollars, though he never 
mentioned the price till I asked him. 

And he stated the price in a sorry way, as though the music and the 
make of an instrument count for a million times more than the 
pnce in money 

I thought he had a real soul and knew a lot about God 
There was light in his eyes of one who has conquered sorrow in so far as 
sorrow is conquerable or worth conquering 
Anyway he is the only Chicago citizen I was jealous of tliat day 
He played a dance tliey play in some parts of Italy when the harvest of 
grapes is over and the wine presses are ready for work. 


NIGGER 


I AM the nigger 
Singer of songs, 

Dancer 

Softer than fluff of cotton . . . 

Harder than dark earth 
Roads beaten in the sun 
By the bare feet of slaves . . 

Foam of teeth breaking crash of laughter 
Red love of the blood of woman. 

White love of the tumbling pickaninnies 
Lazy love of the banjo thrum . 

Sweated and dnven for the harvest-wage, 

Loud laughter with hands like hams. 

Fists toughened on the handles, 

Smiling the slumber dreams of old jungles. 

Crazy as the sun and dew and dripping, heaving life of the jungle, 



24 


  


Brooding and muttering with memories of shackles 
I am the nigger 
Look at me 
I am the nigger 


TWO NEIGHBORS 

Faces of two eternities keep looking at me 
One IS Omar Khayam and the red stuff 

wherein men forget yesterday and tomonow 
and remember only the voices and songs, 
the stones, newspapers and fights of today 
One IS Louis Comaro and a slim trick 

of slow, short meals across slow, short years, 
letting Death open the door only in slow, short inches 
I have a neighbor who swears by Omar 
I have a neighbor who swears by Cornaro. 

Both are happy 

Faces of two eternities keep looking at me 

Let them look 


STYLE 

Style— go ahead talking about style 
You can tell where a man gets his style just 
as you can tell where Pavlowa got her legs 
or Ty Cobb his batting eye. 

Go on talking 

Only don’t take my style away 
It’s my face 
Maybe no good 

but anyway, my face 

I talk with it, I sing with it, I see, taste and feel with it, I know why I 
want to keep it. 

Kill my style 

and you break Pavlowa’s legs, 
and you blind Ty Cobb’s batting eye 


CHICAGO POEMS 


25 


TO BEACHEY, 1912 

Riding against the east, 

A veering, steady shadow 

Purrs the motor-call 

Of the man-bird 

Ready with the death-laughter 

In his throat 

And in his heart always 

The love of the big blue beyond 

Only a man, 

A far fleck of shadow on the east 

Sitting at ease 

With his hands on a wheel 

And around him the large gray wings 

Hold him, great soft wings. 

Keep and deal kindly, O wings. 

With the cool, calm shadow at the wheel 


UNDER A HAT RIM 

While the hum and the hurry 
Of passing footfalls 
Beat in my ear like the restless surf 
Of a wind-blown sea, 

A soul came to me 
Out of the look on a face 

Eyes like a lake 
Where a storm-wind roams 
Caught me from under 
The nm of a hat 

I thought of a midsea wreck 
and bruised fingers clinging 
to a broken state-room door 




26 


  


IN A BREATH 
To the Williamson Brothers 

High noon White sun flashes on the Michigan Avenue asphalt Drum 
of hoofs and whirr of motors Women trapesing along in flimsy 
clothes catching play of sun-fire to their shin and eyes 

Inside the playhouse are movies from under the sea From the heat of 
pavements and the dust of sidewalks, passers-by go in a breath to be 
witnesses of large cool sponges, large cool fishes, large cool valle3s 
and ridges of coral spread silent in the soak of the ocean floor thou 
sands of years 

A naked swimmer dives A knife in his right hand shoots a streak at the 
throat of a shark The tail of the shark lashes One swing would kill 
the swimmer . Soon the knife goes into the soft underncck of 
the veenng fish . . Its mouthful of teeth, each tooth a dagger 
itself, set row on row, glistens when the shuddering, yawning cadaver 
IS hauled up by the brothers of the swimmer 

Outside in the street is the murmur and singing of life in the sun- 
horses, motors, women trapesing along in flimsy clothes, play of sun- 
fire m their blood 


BATH 

A MAN saw the whole world as a gnnning skull and cross-bones The 
rose flesh of hfe shnveled from all faces Nothing counts Everything is a 
fake Dust to dust and ashes to ashes and then an old darkness and a 
useless silence So he saw it all Then he went to a Mischa Elman con- 
cert Two hours waves of sound beat on his eardrums Music washed 
somethmg or other inside him Music broke down and rebuilt something 
or other m his head and heart He joined in five encores for the young 
Russian Jew with the fiddle When he got outside his heels hit the side- 
walk a new way. He was the same man in the same world as before Only 
there was a singing fire and a chmb of roses everlastingly over the world 
he looked on. 



CHICAGO POEMS 


27 


BRONZES 

I 

The bronze General Grant nding a bronze horse in Lincoln Park 
Shrivels in the sun by day when the motor cars whirr by in long proces- 
sions going somewhere to keep appointments for dinner and matine6s 
and buying and selling 

Though in the dusk and nightfall when high waves are piling 
On the slabs of the promenade along the lake shore near by 
I have seen the general dare the combers come closer 
And make to ride his bronze horse out into the hoofs and guns of the 
storm 

n 

I cross Lincoln Park on a winter night when the snow is falling 
Lincoln in bronze stands among the white lines of snow, his bronze 
forehead meeting soft echoes of the newsies crying forty thousand 
men are dead along the Yser, his bronze ears listening to the mum- 
bled roar of the city at his bronze feet 
A lithe Indian on a bronze pony, Shakespeare seated with long legs m 
bronze, Garibaldi in a bronze cape, they hold places in the cold, 
lonely snow tonight on their pedestals and so they will hold them 
past midnight and into the dawn 


DUNES 

What do we see here in the sand dunes of the white moon alone with 
our thoughts. Bill, 

Alone with our dreams. Bill, soft as the women tying scarves around their 
heads dancing. 

Alone with a picture and a picture coming one after the other of all the 
dead. 

The dead more than all these grains of sand one by one piled here in the 
moon, 

Piled against the sky-line taking shapes like the hand of the wind wanted. 

What do we see here. Bill, outside of what the wise men beat their 
heads on. 

Outside of what the poets cry for and the soldiers dnve on headlong and 
leave their skulls in the sun for— what. Bill? 



28 


  


ON THE WAY 

Little one, you have been buzzing in the books, 

Flittering in the newspapers and drinking beer with lawyers 
And amid the educated men of the clubs jou have been getting an earful 
of speech from trained tongues 
Take an earful from me once, go with me on a hike 
Along sand stretches on the great inland sea here 
And while the eastern breeze blows on us and the restless surge 
Of the lake waves on the breakwater breaks with an ever fresh monotone, 
Let us ask ourselves What is truth? what do you oi I know? 

How much do the wisest of the world’s men know about where the 
massed human procession is going? 

You have heard the mob laughed at? 

I ask you Is not the mob rough as the mountains are rough? 

And all things human rise from the mob and relapse and rise again as 
ram to the sea? 


READY TO KILL 

Ten minutes now I have been looking at this 
I have gone by here before and wondered about it 
This IS a bronze memonal of a famous general 
Riding horseback with a flag and a sword and a revolver on him 
I want to smash the whole thing mto a pile of ]unk to be hauled away to 
the scrap yard 
I put it straight to you, 

After the farmer, the miner, the shop man, the factory hand, the fireman 
and the teamster. 

Have all been remembered with bronze memorials. 

Shaping them on the ]ob of getting all of us 
Something to eat and something to wear. 

When they stack a few silhouettes 
Against the sky 
Here in the park, 


CHICAGO POEMS 


29 


And show the real huskies that are doing the work of the world, and 
feeding people instead of butchering them, 

Then maybe I will stand here 

And look easy at this general of the army holding a flag in the air. 

And riding like hell on horseback 
Ready to kill anybody that gets m his way, 

Ready to run the red blood and slush the bowels of men all over the 
sweet new grass of the prairie 


TO A CONTEMPORARY BUNKSHOOTER 

You come along tearing your shirt yelling about Jesus 
Where do you get that stuffs 
What do you know about Jesus? 

Jesus had a way of talking soft and outside of a few bankers and higher- 
ups among the con men of Jerusalem everybody liked to have this 
Jesus around because he never made any fake passes and everything 
he said went and he helped the sick and gave the people hope 

You come along squirting words at us, shaking your fist and calling us 
all dam fools so fierce the froth slobbers over your lips always 
blabbing we're all going to hell straight oflF and you know all 
about it 

IVe read Jesus' words I know what he said You don't throw any scare 
into me I've got your number I know how much you know about 
Jesus 

He never came near clean people or dirty people but they felt clearer 
because he came along It was your crowd of bankers and business 
men and lawyers hired the sluggers and murderers who put Jesus out 
of the running 

I say the same bunch backing you nailed the nails into the hands of this 
Jesus of Nazareth Pie had lined up against him the same crooks and 
strong-arm men now lined up with you paying your way 

This Jesus was good to look at, smelled good, listened good He threw 
out something fresh and beautiful from the skin of his body and the 
touch of his hands wherever he passed along 


30 


  


You slimy bunkshooter, you put a smut on every human blossom m reach 
of your rotten breath belching about hell-fire and hiccupping about 
this Man who lived a clean life in Galilee 

When are you going to quit making the carpenters build emergency 
hospitals for women and girls driven crazy with wrecked nerves fiom 
your gibberish about Jesus— I put it to you again Where do \ou get 
that stuff, what do you know about Jesus^ 

Go ahead and bust all the chairs you want to Smash a whole wagon 
load of furniture at every performance Turn sixty somersaults and 
stand on your nutty head. If it wasn’t for the wa^ >ou scare the 
women and kids I’d feel sorry for you and pass the hat 

I like to watch a good four-flusher work, but not when he starts people 
puking and calling for the doctors 

I like a man that’s got nerve and can pull off a gieat original performance, 
but you— you're only a bug-house peddler of second-hand gospel— 
you’re only shoving out a phoney imitation of the goods this Jesus 
wanted free as air and sunlight 

You tell people living m shanties Jesus is going to fix it up all right with 
them by giving them mansions in the skies after they’re dead and the 
worms have eaten ’em 

You tell $6 a week department store girls all they need is Jesus, you take 
a steel trust wop, dead without having lived, gray and shrunken at 
forty years of age, and you tell him to look at Jesus on the cross and 
he’ll be all nght 

You tell poor people they don’t need any more money on payday and 
even if it’s fierce to be out of a job, Jesus’ll fix that up all right, all 
right— all they gotta do is take Jesus the way you say. 

I’m telling you Jesus wouldn’t stand for the stuff you’re handing out. Jesus 
played it different The bankers and lawyers of Jerusalem got their 
sluggers and murderers to go after Jesus just because Jesus wouldn’t 
play their game He didn’t sit in with the big thieves, 

I don’t want a lot of gab from a bunkshooter m my religion 

I won’t take my religion from any man who never works except with his 
mouth and never chenshes any memory except the face of the 
woman on the Amencan silver dollar. 



CHICAGO POEMS 


31 


I ask you to come through and show me where you’re pounng out the 
blood of your life 

I’ve been to this suburb of Jerusalem they call Golgotha, where they 
nailed Him, and I know if the story is straight it was real blood ran 
from His hands and the nail-holes, and it was real blood spurted in 
red drops where the spear of the Roman soldier rammed m between 
the ribs of this Jesus of Nazareth 


SKYSCRAPER 

By day the skyscraper looms m the smoke and sun and has a soul 

Frame and valley, streets of the city, pour people into it and they mingle 
among its twenty floors and are poured out agam back to the streets, 
praines and valleys 

It IS the men and women, boys and girls so poured in and out all day 
that give the building a soul of dreams and thoughts and memories 

(Dumped in the sea or fixed in a desert, who would care for the building 
or speak its name or ask a policeman the way to it?) 

Elevators slide on their cables and tubes catch letters and parcels and iron 
pipes carry gas and water in and sewage out 

Wires climb with secrets, cany light and carry words, and tell terrors and 
profits and loves— curses of men grappling plans of business and 
questions of women in plots of love 

Hour by hour the caissons reach down to the rock of the earth and hold 
the building to a turning planet 

Hour by hour the girders play as ribs and reach out and hold together the 
stone walls and floors 

Hour by hour the hand of the mason and the stuff of the mortar clinch 
the pieces and parts to the shape an architect voted 

Hour by hour the sun and the ram, the air and the rust, and the press of 
time runnmg into centuries, plsy on the building inside and out and 
use it 

Men who sunk the pilings and mixed the mortar are laid in graves where 
the wind whistles a wild song without words 

And so are men who strung the wires and fixed the pipes and tubes and 
those who saw it rise floor by floor 



32 


  


Souls of them all are here, even the hod tamer begging at back doors 
hundreds of miles awa> and the bncklatci who went to stale’s prison 
for shooting another man while drunk 

(One man fell from a girder and broke his netk at the end of a straight 
plunge— he is here— his soul has gone into the stones of the building ) 

On the office doors from tier to tier- hundreds of names and each name 
standing for a face written acioss with a dead child, a passionate 
lover, a driving ambition for a million dollar business or a lobster’s 
ease of life 

Behind the signs on the doors they work and the walls tell nothing from 
room to room 

Ten-dollar-a-week stenographers take letters from corporation officers, 
lawyers, efficiency engineers, and tons of letters go bundled from the 
building to all ends of the earth 

Smiles and tears of each office girl go into the soul of the building just 
the same as the master-men who rule the building 

Hands of clocks turn to noon houis and each floor empties its men and 
women who go away and eat and come back to work 

Toward the end of the afternoon all work slackens and all jobs go slow'er 
as the people feel day closing on them 

One by one the floors are emptied . . . The uniformed elevator men arc 
gone Pails clang Scrabbers work, talking in foieign tongues 
Broom and water and mop clean from the floors human dust and 
spit, and machine grime of the day 

Spelled in electric fire on the roof are words telling miles of houses and 
people where to buy a thing for money The sign speaks till midnight 

Darkness on the hallways Voices echo Silence holds Watchmen 
walk slow from floor to floor and try the doors Revolvers bulge from 
their hip pockets Steel safes stand in comeis Money is stacked 
in them 

A young watchman leans at a window and sees the lights of barges but 
ting their way across a harbor, nets of red and white lanterns m a 
railroad yard, and a span of glooms splashed with lines of white and 
blurs of crosses and clusters over the sleeping city 

By night the skyscraper looms in the smoke and the stars and has a soul 



33 


HaiKAfiiiL 


FOG 

The fog comes 
on little cat feet 

It sits lookmg 
over harbor and city 
on silent haunches 
and then moves on 


POOL 

Out of the fire 
Came a man sunken 
To less than cinders, 

A tea-cup of ashes or so 
And I, 

The gold in the house, 
Wnthed into a stiff pool 


JAN KUBELIK 

Your bow swept over a string, and a long low note quivered to the air. 
(A mother of Bohemia sobs over a new child perfect learning to suck 
milk) 

Your bow ran fast over all the high stnngs fluttenng and wild 
(All the girls m Bohemia are laughing on a Sunday afternoon in the hills 
with their lovers ) 


34 


  


CHOOSE 

The single clenched fist lifted and ready. 

Or the open asking hand held out and waiting 
Choose 

For we meet by one or the other 


CRIMSON 

Cmmson is the slow smolder of the cigar end I hold. 

Gray is the ash that stiffens and covers all silent the fire 
(A great man I know is dead and while he lies in his coflSn a gone flame 
I sit here in cumbering shadows and smoke and watch my thoughts 
come and go) 


WHITELIGHT 

Your whitelight flashes the frost tonight 
Moon of the purple and silent west 
Remember me one of your lovers of dreams 


FLUX 

Sand of the sea mns red 
Where the sunset reaches and quivers 
Sand of the sea runs yellow 
Where the moon slants and wavers 


KIN 

Brother, I am fire 
Surging under the ocean floor 
I shall never meet you, brother— 
Not for years, anyhow. 


CHICAGO POEMS 


35 


Maybe thousands of years, brother 
Then I will warm you. 

Hold you close, wrap you m circles. 
Use you and change you — 

Maybe thousands of years, brother 


WHITE SHOULDERS 

Your white shoulders 
I remember 

And your shrug of laughter 

Low laughter 
Shaken slow 

From your white shoulders 


LOSSES 

I HAVE love 
And a child, 

A ban)o 
And shadows 
(Losses of God, 

All will go 
And one day 
We will hold 
Only the shadows ) 


TROTHS 

Yellow dust on a bumble 
bee’s wing. 

Grey lights m a woman’s 
asking eyes. 

Red rums in the changing 
sunset embers- 




36 


  


I take you and pile high 
the memories 

Death will break her claws 
on some I keep 


(1914--1915) 


KILLERS 


I AM Singing to you 
Soft as a man with a dead child speaks. 

Hard as a man m handcuffs, 

Held where he cannot move 

Under the sun 
Are sixteen million men, 

Chosen for shining teeth. 

Sharp eyes, hard legs, 

And a running of young warm blood m their wrists 

And a red juice runs on the green grass. 

And a red juice soaks the dark soil 

And the sixteen million are killing and killing and killing 

I never foiget them day or night 
They beat on my head for memory of them, 

They pound on my heart and I cry back to them, 

To their homes and women, dreams and games 



CHICAGO POEMS 


37 


I wake in the night and smell the trenches. 

And hear the low stir of sleepers in lines— 

Sixteen million sleepers and pickets in the dark 
Some of them long sleepers for always, 

Some of them tumbling to sleep tomorrow for always. 
Fixed in the drag of the world’s heartbreak. 

Eating and drinking, toiling on a long job of killing 
Sixteen million men 


AMONG THE RED GUNS 

After waking at dawn one morning when the wind sang low among dry 

leaves in an elm 

Among the red guns. 

In the hearts of soldiers 
Running free blood 
In the long, long campaign 
Dreams go on 

Among the leather saddles. 

In the heads of soldiers 
Heavy in the wracks and kills 
Of all straight fighting 
Dreams go on 

Among the hot muzzles. 

In the hands of soldiers 

Brought from flesh-folds of women — 

Soft amid the blood and crying— 

In all your hearts and heads 

Among the guns and saddles and muzzles 

Dreams, 

Dreams go on. 

Out of the dead on their backs, 

Broken and no use any more 
Dreams of the way and the end go on 




38 


  


IRON 

Guns, 

Long, steel guns. 

Pointed from the war ships 
In the name of the war god 
Straight, shining, polished guns, 

Clambered over with )ackies in white blouses. 
Glory of tan faces, tousled hair, white teeth. 
Laughing lithe )ackies in white blouses. 

Sitting on the guns singing war songs, war chanties 

Shovels, 

Broad, iron shovels. 

Scooping out oblong vaults, 

Loosening turf and leveling sod 

I ask you 
To witness— 

The shovel is brother to the gun 


MURMURINGS IN A FIELD HOSPITAL 
[They picked him up in the grass where he had lain two days in the ram 
with a piece of shrapnel in his lungs ] 

Come to me only with playthings now 
A picture of a singing woman with blue eyes 
Standing at a fence of hollyhocks, poppies and sunflowers 
Or an old man I remember sitting with children telling stones 
Of days that never happened anywhere in the world 

No more iron cold and real to handle, 

Shaped for a dnve straight ahead 

Bnng me only beautaful useless things 

Only old home things touched at sunset in the quiet 

And at the window one day m summer 

Yellow of the new crock of butter 

Stood against the red of new climbing roses 

And the world was all playthings 




CHICAGO POEMS 


39 


STATISTICS 

Napoleon shifted, 

Restless in the old sarcophagus 
And murmured to a watchguard 
'Who goes there?"' 

"Twenty-one million men. 

Soldiers, armies, guns. 

Twenty-one million 
Afoot, horseback, 

In the air. 

Under the sea 

And Napoleon turned to his sleep 
"It is not my world answering, 

It IS some dreamer who knows not 
The world I marched in 
From Calais to Moscow " 

And he slept on 
In the old sarcophagus 
While the aeroplanes 
Droned their motors 
Between Napoleon's mausoleum 
And the cool night stars 


FIGHT 

Red drips from my chm where I have been eating 

Not all the blood, nowhere near all, is wiped off my mouth 

Clots of red mess my hair 

And the tiger, the buffalo, know how 

I was a killer 

Yes, I am a killer 


I come from killing 
I go to more 




40 


  


I drive red joy ahead of me from killing 

Red gluts and red hungers run m the smears and juices of my inside bones 
The child cnes for a suck mother and I cry for war 


BUTTONS 

I HAVE been watching the war map slammed up for advertising m front 
of the newspaper office 

Buttons — red and yellow buttons — blue and black buttons — are shoved 
back and forth across the map 

A laughing young man, sunny with freckles, 

Climbs a ladder, yells a joke to somebody m the crowd, 

And then fixes a yellow button one inch west 

And follows the yellow button with a black button one inch west 

(Ten thousand men and boys twist on their bodies in a red soak along a 
nver edge, 

Gasping of wounds, calling for water, some rattling death in their throats ) 

Who would guess what it cost to move two buttons one inch on the war 
map here m front of the newspaper oflEce where the freckle-faced 
young man is laughing to us? 


AND THEY OBEY 


Smash down the cities 
Knock the walls to pieces 

Break the factones and cathedrals, warehouses and homes 
Into loose piles of stone and lumber and black burnt wood 
You are the soldiers and we command you 

Build up the cities. 

Set up the walls again 

Put together once more the factones and cathedrals, warehouses and homes 
Into buildings for hfe and labor: 

You are workmen and citizens all We command you. 


CHICAGO POEMS 


4 ^ 


JAWS 

Seven nations stood with their hands on the jaws of death 
It was the first week in August, Nineteen Hundred Fourteen 
I was listening, you were listening, the whole world was listening. 
And all of us heard a Voice murmuring 
"'I am the way and the light, 

He that believeth on me 
Shall not perish 
But shall have everlasting life 
Seven nations listening heard the Voice and answered 
"O Helh’' 

The jaws of death began clicking and they go on clicking 


SALVAGE 

Guns on the battle lines have pounded now a year between Bnissels and 
Pans 

And, William Morns, when I read your old chapter on the great arches 
and naves and little whimsical comers of the Churches of Northern 
France— Brr-rr! 

Fm glad you’re a dead man, William Morns, Fm glad you’re down m the 
damp and mouldy, only a memory instead of a living man— -I’m glad 
you’re gone 

You never lied to us, William Moms, you loved the shape of those stones 
piled and carved for you to dream over and wonder because workmen 
got )oy of life into them. 

Workmen in aprons singing while they hammered, and praying, and put- 
ting their songs and prayers into the walls and roofs, the bastions and 
cornerstones and gargoyles — all their children and kisses of women 
and wheat and roses growing 

I say, William Morris, Fm glad you’re gone, Fm glad you’re a dead man 

Guns on the battle lines have pounded a year now between Brussels and 
Pans. 




42 


  


WARS 

In the old wars drum of hoofs and the beat of shod feet 
In the new wars hum of motors and the tread of rubber tires 
In the wars to come silent wheels and whirr of rods not yet dreamed out 
in the heads of men 

In the old wars clutches of short swords and ]abs into faces with spears 
In the new wars long-range guns and smashed walls, guns running a spit 
of metal and men falling in tens and twenties 
In the wars to come new silent deaths, new silent hurlers not yet dreamed 
out in the heads of men 

In the old wars kings quarreling and thousands of men following 
In the new wars kings quarreling and millions of men following 
In the wars to come kings kicked under the dust and millions of men fol- 
lowing great causes not yet dreamed out in the heads of men 


Tlie RoaJ. and itlie End 


THE ROAD AND THE END 

I SHALL foot it 

Down the roadway in the dush, 
Where shapes of hunger wander 
And the fugitives of pain go by 
I shall foot it 

In the silence of the morning. 

See the night slur into dawn, 

Hear the slow great winds arise 




CHICAGO POEMS 


43 


Where tall trees flank the way 
And shoulder toward the sky 

The broken boulders by the road 

Shall not commemorate my rum 

Regret shall be the gravel under foot 

I shall watch for 

Shm birds swift of wing 

That go where wind and ranks of thunder 

Dnve the wild processionals of ram 

The dust of the traveled road 
Shall touch my hands and face 


CHOICES 

They offer you many things, 

I a few 

Moonlight on the play of fountains at night 
With water sparkling a drowsy monotone. 
Bare-shouldered, smiling women and talk 
And a cross-play of loves and adulteries 
And a fear of death 

and a remembering of regrets 
All this they offer you 
I come with 

salt and bread 
a terrible job of work 
and tireless war. 

Come and have now 
hunger 
danger 
and hate 


GRAVES 

I DREAMED One man stood against a thousand, 
One man damned as a wrongheaded fool 
One year and another he walked the streets. 




44 


  


And a thousand shrags and hoots 

Met him in the shoulders and mouths he passed 

He died alone 

And only the undertaker came to his funeral 

Flowers grow over his grave anod m the wind, 
And over the graves of the thousand, too. 

The flowers grow anod in the wind 

Flowers and the wind. 

Flowers anod over the graves of the dead. 

Petals of red, leaves of yellow, streaks of white, 
Masses of purple sagging 
I love you and your great way of forgethng 


AZTEC MASK 

I WANTED a man’s face looking into the jaws and throat of life 
With something proud on his face, so proud no smash of -the jaws, 
No gulp of the throat leaves the face in the end 
With anything else than the old proud look 

Even to the finish, dumped in the dust, 

Lost among the used-up cinders. 

This face, men would say, is a flash. 

Is laid on bones taken from the nbs of the earth. 

Ready for the hammers of changing, changing years. 
Ready for the sleeping, sleeping years of silence 
Ready for the dust and fire and wind 
I wanted this face and I saw it today in an Aztec mask 
A cry out of storm and dark, a red yell and a purple prayer, 

A beaten shape of ashes 

waiting the sunrise or night, 
something or nothing, 
proud-mouthed, 
proud-eyed gambler 


CHICAGO POEMS 


45 


MOMUS 

Momus is the name men give your face^ 

The brag of its tone, like a long low steamboat whistle 
Finding a way mid mist on a shoreland, 

Where gray rocks let the salt water shatter spray 
Against horizons purple, silent 

Yes, Momus, 

Men have flung your face m bronze 

To gaze in gargoyle downward on a stieet-whirl of folk 

They were artists did this, shaped your sad mouth, 

Gave you a tall forehead slanted with calm, broad wisdom. 

All your lips to the corners and your cheeks to the high bones 
Thrown over and through with a smile that forever wishes and wishes, 
purple, silent, fled from all the iron things of life, evaded like a sought 
bandit, gone into dreams, by God 

I wonder, Momus, 

Whether shadows of the dead sit somewhere and look with deep laughter 
On men who play in temble earnest the old, known, solemn repetitions 
of history 

A droning monotone soft as sea laughter hovers from your kindliness of 
bronze. 

You give me the human ease of a mountain peak, purple, silent. 

Granite shoulders heaving above the earth curves. 

Careless eye-witness of the spawning tides of men and women 
Swarming always in a drift of millions to the dust of toil, the salt of tears. 
And blood drops of undimimshmg war 


THE ANSWER 

You have spoken the answer 
A child searches far sometimes 
Into the red dust 

On a dark rose leaf 
And so you have gone far 

For the answer is* 

Silence 


46 


  


In the republic 

Of the winking stars 

and spent cataclysms 

Sure we are it is off there the answer is hidden and folded over. 

Sleeping in the sun, careless whether it is Sunday or any other day of the 
week, 

Knowing silence will bring all one way or another 

Have we not seen 

Purple of the pansy 

out of the mulch 
and mold 
crawl 

into a dusk 
of velvet^ 
blur of yellow^ 

Almost we thought from nowhere but it was the silence, 
the future, 
working 


TO A DEAD MAN 

Over the dead line we have called to you 
To come across with a word to us. 

Some beaten whisper of what happens 
Where you are over the dead line 
Deaf to our calls and voiceless 

The flickering shadows have not answered 
Nor your lips sent a signal 
Whether love talks and roses grow 
And the sun bieaks at morning 
Splattering the sea with crimson 



CHICAGO POEMS 


47 


UNDER 

I 

I AM the undertow 
Washing tides of power 
Battering the pillars 
Under your things of high law 

II 

I am a sleepless 
Slowfarmg eater, 

Maker of rust and rot 
In your bastioned fastenings, 
Caissons deep 

m 

I am the Law 
Older than you 
And your builders proud 

I am deaf 
In all days 
Whether you 
Say ‘Tes" or "No^^ 

I am the crumbier 
Tomorrow 


A SPHINX 

Close-mouthed you sat five thousand years and never let out a whisper 
Processions came by, marchers, asking questions you answered with gray 
eyes never blinking, shut lips never talking 
Not one croak of anything you know has come from your cat crouch of 
ages 

I am one of those who know all you know and I keep my questions. I 
know the answers you hold 



  


WHO AM P 

My head knocks against the stars 
My feet are on the hilltops 

My finger-tips are m the valleys and shores of universal life 
Down in the sounding foam of primal things I reach my hands and play 
with pebbles of destiny 
I have been to hell and back many times 
I know all about heaven, for I have talked with God 
I dabble in the blood and guts of the terrible 
I know the passionate seizure of beauty 

And the marvelous rebellion of man at all signs reading “Keep Off ” 

My name is Truth and I am the most elusive captive in the universe 


OUR PRAYER OF THANKS 

For the gladness here where the sun is shining at evening on the weeds at 
the river, 

Our prayer of thanks 

For the laughter of children who tumble barefooted and bareheaded in 
the summer grass, 

Our prayer of thanks 

For fte sunset and the stars, the women and the white arms that hold us. 

Our prayer of thanks 

God, 

If you are deaf and blind, if this is all lost to you, 

God, if the dead in their coffins amid the silver handles on the edge of 
town, or the reckless dead of war days thrown unknown in pits, if 
these dead are forever deaf and blind and lost. 

Our prayer of thanks. 

God, 

The game is all your way, the secrets and the signals and the system, and 
so for the break of the game and the first play and the last. 

Our prayer of thanks 


49 


Fogs and Fires 


AT A WINDOW 

Give me hunger, 

O you gods that sit and give 

The world its orders 

Give me hunger, pain and want, 

Shut me out with shame and failure 
From your doors of gold and fame, 

Give me your shabbiest, weariest hungerl 

But leave me a little love, 

A voice to speak to me in the day end, 

A hand to touch me in the dark room 
Breaking the long loneliness 
In the dusk of day-shapes 
Blurnng the sunset, 

One little wandering, western star 

Thrust out from the changing shores of shadow 

Let me go to the window. 

Watch there the day-shapes of dusk 
And wait and know the coming 
Of a little love. 


UNDER THE HARVEST MOON 

JJmyER the harvest moon. 

When the soft silver 
Drips shimmering 
Over the garden nights, 




50 


  


Death, the gray mocker, 

Comes and whispers to you 
As a beautiful friend 
Who remembers 

Under the summer roses 
When the flagrant crimson 
Lurks in the dusk 
Of the wild red leaves. 

Love, with little hands, 

Comes and touches you 
With a thousand memories. 

And asks you 

Beautiful, unanswerable questions 


THE GREAT HUNT 

I CANNOT tell you now. 

When the wind’s drive and whirl 
Blow me along no longer. 

And the wind’s a whisper at last— 

Maybe I'll tell you then- 

some Other time 

When the rose’s flash to the sunset 
Reels to the rack and the twist. 

And the rose is a red bygone. 

When the face I love is going 
And the gate to the end shall clang. 

And it’s no use to beckon or say, “So long”— 
Maybe I’ll tell you then- 

some other time 

I never knew any more beautiful than you 
I have hunted you under my thoughts, 

I have broken down under the wind 
And into the roses looking for you 
I shall never find any 


greater than you 


CHICAGO POEMS 


5^ 


MONOTONE 

The monotone of the ram is beautiful, 
And the sudden rise and slow relapse 
Of the long multitudinous ram 

The sun on the hills is beautiful. 

Or a captured sunset sea-flung, 

Bannered with fire and gold 

A face I know is beautiful— 

With fire and gold of sky and sea. 

And the peace of long warm ram 


JOY 

Let a joy keep you 
Reach out your hands 
And take it when it runs by. 

As the Apache dancer 
Clutches his woman 
I have seen them 
Live long and laugh loud, 

Sent on singing, singing. 

Smashed to the heart 
Under the ribs 
With a terrible love 
Joy always, 

Joy everywhere— 

Let joy kill youf 

Keep away from the little deaths 



52 


  


SHIRT 

I REMEMBER oncc I ran after you and tagged the fluttering shirt of you in 
the wind 

Once many days ago I drank a glassful of something and the picture of 
you shivered and slid on top of the stuff 

And again it was nobody else but you I heard in the singing voice of a care- 
less humming woman 

One night when I sat with chums telling stories at a bonfire flickering red 
embers, in a language its own talking to a spread of white stars 
It was you that slunk laughing 
in the clumsy staggering shadows 

Broken answers of remembrance let me know you are alive with a peering 
phantom face behind a doorway somewhere in the city's push and fun 

Or under a pack of moss and leaves waiting in silence under a twist of 
oaken arms ready as ever to run away again when I tag the fluttering 
shirt of you 


AZTEC 

You came from the Aztecs 
With a copper on your fore-arms 
Tawnier than a sunset 
Saying good-by to an even river 

And I said, you remember, 

Those fore-arms of yours 
Were finer than bronzes 
And you were glad 

It was tears 

And a path west 

and a home-going 
when I asked 

Why there were scars of worn gold 
Where a man's nng was fixed once 



CHICAGO POEMS 


53 


On your third finger 

And I call you 

To come back 

before the days are longer 


TWO 

Memory of you is a blue spear of flower 
I cannot remember the name of it 
Alongside a bold dripping poppy is fire and silk 

And they cover you 


BACK YARD 

Shine on, O moon of summer 

Shine to the leaves of grass, catalpa and oak. 

All silver under your rain tonight 

An Italian boy is sending songs to you tonight from an accordion 
A Polish boy is out with his best girl, they marr>^ next month, tonight they 
are throwing you kisses 

An old man next door is dreaming over a sheen that sits in a cherry tree 
111 his back yard 

The clocks say I must go— I stay here sitting on the back porch drinking 
white thoughts you ram down 

Shine on, O moon. 

Shake out more and more silver changes 


ON THE BREAKWATER 

On the breakwater in the summer dark, a man and a girl are sitting, 

She across his knee and they are looking face into face 
Talking to each other without words, singing rhythms in silence to each 
other 




54 


COMPLETE POLIVIS 


A funnel of white ranges the blue dusk from an outgoing boat, 
Playing its searchlight, puzzled, abrupt, over a streak of green. 
And two on the breakwater keep their silence, she on his knee 


MASK 

Fling your red scarf faster and faster, dancer 

It IS summer and the sun loves a million green lea\es, masses of green 

Your red scarf flashes across them calling and a-calling 

The Silk and flare of it is a great soprano leading a chorus 

Carried along in a rouse of voices reaching for the heart of the world 

Your toes are singing to meet the song of your arms 

Let the red scarf go swifter 
Summer and the sun command you 


PEARL FOG 

Open the door now 
Go roll up the collar of your coat 
To walk in the changing scarf of mist 

Tell your sins here to the pearl fog 
And know for once a deepening night 
Strange as the half-meanings 
Alurk in a wise woman's mousey eyes 

Yes, tell your sms 

And know how careless a pearl fog is 
Of the laws you have broken 


I SANG 

I SANG to you and the moon 
But only the moon remembers 
I sang 



CHICAGO POEMS 


55 


O reckless free-hearted 

free-throated rhythms, 
Even the moon remembers them 
And IS kind to me 


FOLLIES 

Shaken, 

The blossoms of lilac, 

And shattered. 

The atoms of purple 
Green dip the leaves, 

Darker the bark, 

Longer the shadows 

Sheer lines of poplar 
Shimmer with masses of silver 
And down in a garden old with years 
And broken walls of rum and story, 
Roses rise with red ram-memories 
May* 

In the open world 
The sun comes and finds your face, 
Remembenng all 


JUNE 

Paula is digging and shaping the loam of a salvia. 

Scarlet Chinese talker of summer 
Two petals of crabapple blossom blow fallen in Paula's hair, 
And fluff of white from a cottonwood. 


NOCTURNE IN A DESERTED BRICKYARD 

Stuff of the moon 
Runs on the lapping sand 
Out to the longest shadows 



56 


  


Under the curving willows, 

And round the creep of the wave line, 

Fluxions of yellow and dusk on the waters 

Make a wide dreaming pansy of an old pond in the night 


HYDRANGEAS 

Dragoons, I tell you the white hydrangeas turn rust and go soon 
Already mid-September a line of brown runs over them 
One sunset after another tracks the faces, the petals 
Waiting, they look over the fence for what way they go 


THEME IN YELLOW 

I SPOT the hills 
With yellow balls in autumn 
I light the prairie cornfields 
Orange and tawny gold clusters 
And I am called pumpkins 
On the last of October 
When dusk is fallen 
Children join hands 
And circle round me 
Singing ghost songs 
And love to the harvest moon, 

I am a jack-o’-lantem 
With terrible teeth 
And the children know 
I am fooling 


BETWEEN TWO HILLS 

Between two hills 
The old town stands. 

The houses loom 
And the roofs and trees 
And the dusk and the dark, 


CHICAGO POEMS 


57 


The damp and the dew 
Are there 

The prayers are said 
And the people rest 
For sleep is there 
And the touch of dreams 
Is over all 


LAST ANSWERS 

I WROTE a poem on the mist 

And a woman asked me what I meant by it. 

I had thought till then only of the beauty of the mist, how pearl and 
gray of it mix and reel, 

And change the drab shanties with lighted lamps at evening into points 
of mystery quivering with color 

I answered 

The whole world was mist once long ago and some day it will all go back 
to mist. 

Our skulls and lungs are more water than bone and tissue 

And all poets love dust and mist because all the last answers 

Go running back to dust and mist 


WINDOW 

Night from a railroad car window 
Is a great, dark, soft thing 
Broken across with slashes of light 


YOUNG SEA 

The sea is never still 
It pounds on the shore 
Restless as a young heart, 
Hunting 



58 


  


The sea speaks 

And only the stormy hearts 

Know what it says 

It IS the face 

of a rough mother speaking 

The sea is young 
One storm cleans all the hoar 
And loosens the age of it 
I hear it laughing, reckless 

They love the sea, 

Men who nde on it 
And know they will die 
Under the salt of it 

Let only the young come, 

Says the sea 
Let them kiss my face 
And hear me 
I am the last word 
And I tell 

Where storms and stars come from. 


BONES 

Sling me under the sea 

Pack me down in the salt and wet 

No farmer’s plow shall touch my bones. 

No Hamlet hold my jaws and speak 
How jokes are gone and empty is my mouth 
Long, green-eyed scavengers shall pick my eyes. 
Purple fish play hide-and-seek. 

And I shall be song of thunder, crash of sea, 
Down on the floors of salt and wet 
Sling me . . . under the sea 


CHICAGO POEMS 


59 


PALS 

Take a hold now 
On the silver handles here, 

Six silver handles, 

One for each of his old pals 

Take hold 

And lift him down the stairs, 

Put him on the rollers 
Over the floor of the hearse 

Take him on the last haul. 

To the cold straight house, 

The level even house. 

To the last house of all 

The dead say nothing 

And the dead know much 

And the dead hold under their tongues 

A locked'up story 


CHILD 

The young child, Chnst, is straight and wise 
And asks questions of the old men, questions 
Found under running water for all children 
And found under shadows thrown on still waters 
By tall trees looking downward, old and gnarled 
Found to the eyes of children alone, untold, 

Singing a low song in the loneliness 

And the young child, Christ, goes on asking 

And the old men answer nothing and only know love 

For the young child Christ, straight and wise 


6o 


COAXPLETE POEMS 


POPPIES 

She loves blood-red poppies for a garden to walk m 
In a loose white gown she walks 

and a new child tugs at cords in her bodv 
Her head to the west at evening w'hcn the dew is creeping, 
A shuddei of gladness runs in her bones and toisal fibei 
She loves blood-red poppies for a garden to walk in 


CHILD MOON 

The child’s wonder 

At the old moon 

Comes back nightly 

She points her finger 

To the far silent yellow thing 

Shining through the branches 

Filtering on the leaves a golden sand, 

Crying with her little tongue, “Sec the moon’” 

And m her bed fading to sleep 

With babblings of the moon on hei little mouth. 


MARGARET 

Many birds and the beating of wings 

Make a flinging reckless hum 

In the early morning at the rocks 

Above the blue pool 

Where the gray shadows swim lazy 

In your blue eyes, O reckless child, 

I saw today many little wild wishes, 
Eager as the great morning 


6i 



ga-sw 


POEMS DONE ON A LATE NIGHT CAR 


I CHICKENS 

I AM The Great White Way of the city 
When you ask what is my desire, I answer 
"'Girls fresh as country wild flowers, 

With young faces tired of the cows and bams, 

Eager in their eyes as the dawn to find my mysteries, 

Slender supple girls with shapely legs, 

Lure in the arch of their little shoulders 

And wisdom from the prairies to cry only softly at the ashes of my mys- 
teries 


II USED UP 

Lines based on certain regrets that come with rumination upon the 
painted faces of women on North Clark Street, Chicago 


Roses, 

Red roses, 

Cmshed 

In the rain and wind 
Like mouths of women 
Beaten by the fists of 
Men using them 
O little roses 
And broken leaves 
And petal wisps 
You tliat so flung your cnmson 
To the sun 
Only yesterday 




62 


  


HI HOME 

Here is a thing my heart wishes the world had more of 

I heard it in the air of one night when I listened 

To a mother singing softly to a child restless and angr> in the darkness 


IT IS MUCH 

Women of night life amid the lights 
Where the line of your full, round throats 
Matches in gleam the glint of jour eyes 
And the ring of your heart-deep laughter 
It is much to be warm and sure of tomorrow. 

Women of night life along the shadow's, 

Lean at your throats and skulking the w'alls, 
Gaunt as a bitch worn to the bone, 

Under the paint of your smiling faces 
It IS much to be warm and sure of toinoriow 


TRAFFICKER 

Among the shadows where two streets cross, 

A woman lurks in the dark and waits 
To move on when a policeman heaves in view 
Smiling a broken smile from a face 
Painted over haggard bones and desperate eyes. 
All night she offers passers-by what they will 
Of her beauty wasted, body faded, claims gone. 
And no takers 


HARRISON STREET COURT 

I heard a woman’s lips 
Speaking to a companion 
Say these words 



CHICAGO POEMS 


63 


''A woman what hustles 
Never keeps nothin' 

For all her hustlin' 

Somebody always gets 

What she goes on the street for 

If it ain't a pimp 

It's a bull what gets it 

I been hustlin' now 

Till I ain't much good any more 

I got nothin' to show for it 

Some man got it all, 

Every night's hustlin' I ever did" 


SOILED DOVE 

Let us be honest, the lady was not a harlot until she married a corporation 
lawyer who picked her from a Ziegfeld chorus 
Before then she never took anybody's money and paid for her silk 
stockings out of what she earned singing and dancing 
She loved one man and he loved six women and the game was changing 
her looks, calling for more and more massage money and high coin 
for the beauty doctors 

Now she drives a long, underslung motor car all by herself, reads in the 
day's papers what her husband is doing to the inter-state commerce 
commission, requires a larger corsage from year to year, and wonders 
sometimes how one man is coming along with six women 


JUNGHEIMER'S 

In western fields of corn and northern timber lands. 

They talk about me, a saloon with a soul. 

The soft red lights, the long curving bar. 

The leather seats and dim comers. 

Tall brass spittoons, a nigger cutting ham. 

And the painting of a woman half-dressed thrown reckless across a bed 
after a night of booze and nots 


64 


  


GOxVE 

Everybody loved Chick Lorimcr in our town 
Far off 

Everybody loved her 
So we all love a wild girl keeping a hold 
On a dream she wants 
Nobody knows now where Chick Lorimer went 
Nobody knows why she packed her trunk a few old things 
And IS gone, 

Gone with her little chin 
Thrust ahead of her 
And her soft hair blowing careless 
From under a wide hat, 

Dancer, singer, a laughing passionate lover 

Were there ten men or a hundred hunting Cluck? 

Were there five men or fifty with aching hearts? 

Everybody loved Chick Lonmer 
Nobody knows where she’s gone 


Oitter Dayi 

(1900-1910) 


65 


DREAMS IN THE DUSK 

Dreams in the dusk. 

Only dreams closing the day 
And with the day's close going back 
To the gray things, the dark things. 
The far, deep things of dreamland 

Dreams, only dreams m the dusk, 
Only the old remembered pictures 
Of lost days when the day's loss 
Wrote m tears the heWt's loss 

Tears and loss and broken dreams 
May find your heart at dusk 


DOCKS 

Strolling along 
By the teeming docks, 

I watch the ships put out. 

Black ships that heave and lunge 
And move like mastodons 
Arising from lethargic sleep 

The fathomed harbor 
Calls them not nor dares 
Them to a strain of action. 

But outward, on and outward, 



66 


  


Sounding low-reverberatmg calls, 
Shaggy m the half-lit distance, 

They pass the pointed headland. 
View the wide, far-hfting wilderness 
And leap with cumulative speed 
To test the challenge of the sea 

Plunging, 

Doggedly onward plunging. 

Into salt and mist and foam and sun 


ALL DAY LONG 

All day long in fog and wind. 

The waves have flung their beating crests 
Against the palisades of adamant 

My boy, he went to sea, long and long ago. 

Curls of brown were slipping underneath his cap. 
He looked at me from blue and steely eyes, 
Natty, straight and true, he stepped away. 

My boy, he went to sea 
All day long in fog and wind. 

The waves have flung their beating crests 
Against the palisades of adamant 


WAITING 

Today I will let the old boat stand 
Where the sweep of the harbor tide comes m 
To the pulse of a far, deep-steady sway 
And I will rest and dream and sit on the deck 
Watching the world go by 

And take my pay for many hard days gone I remember 

I will choose what clouds I like 

In the great white fleets that wander the blue 

As I he on my back or loaf at the rail 

And I will listen as the veenng winds kiss me and fold me 

And put on my brow the touch of the world’s great will 


CHICAGO POEMS 


67 


Daybreak will hear the heart of the boat beat, 
Engine throb and piston play 
In the quiver and leap at call of life 
Tomorrow we move m the gaps and heights 
On changing floors of unlevel seas 
And no man shall stop us and no man follow 
For ours is the quest of an unknown shore 
And we are husky and lusty and shoutmg-gay 


FROM THE SHORE 

A LONE gray bird, 

Dim-dippmg, far-flymg, 

Alone m the shadows and grandeurs and tumults 
Of night and the sea 
And the stars and storms 

Out over the darkness it wavers and hovers, 

Out into the gloom it swings and batters. 

Out into the wind and the ram and the vast. 

Out into the pit of a great black world. 

Where fogs are at battle, sky-dnven, sea-blown. 
Love of mist and rapture of flight. 

Glories of chance and hazards of death 
On its eager and palpitant wings 

Out into the deep of the great dark world. 
Beyond the long borders where foam and drift 
Of the sundering waves are lost and gone 
On the tides that plunge and rear and crumble 


UPLANDS IN MAY 

Wonder as of old things 
Fresh and fair come back 
Hangs over pasture and road 
Lush in the lowland grasses rise 
And upland beckons to upland 
The great strong hills are humble. 


68 


  


DREAM GIRL 

You will come one day in a waver of love, 

Tender as dew, impetuous as ram. 

The tan of the sun will be on your skin. 

The purr of the breeze in your murmuring speech. 
You will pose with a hill-flower grace 

You will come, with your slim, expressive arms, 

A poise of the head no sculptor has caught 
And nuances spoken with shoulder and neck. 
Your face in a pass-and-repass of moods 
As many as skies in delicate change 
Of cloud and blue and flimmenng sun 

Yet, 

You may not come, O girl of a dream. 

We may but pass as the world goes by 
And take from a look of eyes into eyes, 

A film of hope and a memoried day 


PLOWBOY 

After the last red sunset glimmer. 

Black on the line of a low hill rise. 

Formed into movmg shadows, I saw 
A plowboy and two horses lined against the gray. 
Plowing in the dusk the last furrow 
The turf had a gleam of brown. 

And smell of soil was m the air. 

And, cool and moist, a haze of April 

I shall remember you long, 

Plowboy and horses against the sky in shadow 
I shall remember you and the picture 
You made for me. 

Turning the turf in the dusk 
And haze of an Apnl gloaming 


CHICAGO POEMS 


69 


BROADWAY 

I SHALL never forget you, Broadway 
Your golden and calling lights 

ni remember you long. 

Tall-walled river of rush and play 

Hearts that know you hate you 

And lips that have given you laughter 

Have gone to their ashes of life and its roses, 

Cursing the dreams that were lost 

In the dust of your harsh and trampled stones 


OLD WOMAN 

The owl-car clatters along, dogged by the echo 
From building and battered paving-stone. 

The headlight scoffs at the mist 

And fixes its yellow rays in the cold slow ram, 

Against a pane I press my forehead 

And drowsily look on the walls and sidewalks 

The headlight finds the way 

And life is gone from the wet and the welter— 

Only an old woman, bloated, disheveled and bleared 
Far-wandered waif of other days. 

Huddles for sleep in a doorway. 

Homeless 


NOON HOUR 

She sits in the dust at the walls 
And makes cigars. 

Bending at the bench 
With fingers wage-anxious. 

Changing her sweat for the day’s pay. 


70 


  


Now the noon houi has come, 

And she leans with her bare arms 
On the window-sill over the river, 

Leans and feels at her throat 
Cool-moving things out of the free open ways 

At her throat and eyes and nostnls 
The touch and the blowing cool 
Of great free ways beyond the walls 


’BOES 

I WAITED today for a freight tram to pass 

Cattle cars with steers butting their horns against the bars, went by 

And a half a dozen hoboes stood on bumpers between cars 

Well, the cattle are respectable, I thought 

Every steer has its transportation paid for by tlie farmer sending it to 
market. 

While the hoboes are law-breakers m riding a railroad tram without a 
ticket 

It reminded me of ten days I spent m the Allegheny County jail in 
Pittsburgh 

I got ten days even though I was a veteran of the Spanish-American war 

Cooped in the same cell with me was an old man, a bricklayer and a 
booze-fighter 

But it ]ust happened he, too, was a veteran soldier, and he had fought 
to preserve the Union and free the niggers 

We were three m all, the other being a Lithuanian who got drunk on 
payday at the steel works and got to fighting a policeman, 

All the clothes he had was a shirt, pants and shoes— somebody got his 
hat and coat and what money he had left over when he got drunk 


UNDER A TELEPHONE POLE 

I AM a copper wire slung in the air. 

Slim against the sun I make not even a clear line of shadow 
Night and day I keep singing— humming and thmmming 


CHICAGO POEMS 




It IS love and war and money, it is the fighting and the tears, the work 
and want, 

Death and laughter of men and women passing through me, carrier of 
your speech, 

In the ram and the wet dripping, in the dawn and the shine drying, 

A copper wire 


I AM THE PEOPLE, THE MOB 

I AM the people— the mob— the crowd— the mass 

Do you know that all the great work of the world is done through me? 

I am the workingman, the inventor, the maker of the world's food and 
clothes 

I am the audience that witnesses history The Napoleons come from me 
and the Lincolns They die And then I send foith more Napoleons 
and Lincolns 

I am the seed ground I am a prairie that will stand for much plowing 
Terrible storms pass over me I forget The best of me is sucked out 
and wasted I forget Everything but Death comes to me and makes 
me work and give up what I have And I forget 

Sometimes I growl, shake myself and spatter a few red drops for history 
to remember Then— I forget 

When I, the People, learn to remember, when I, the People, use the 
lessons of yesterday and no longer forget who robbed me last year, 
who played me for a fool— then there will be no speaker in all the 
world say the name ''The People,'' with any fleck of a sneer in his 
voice or any far-off smile of dension 

The mob— the crowd— the mass— will amve then 


GOVERNMENT 

The Government— I heard about the Government and I went out to find 
it I said I would look closely at it when I saw it 

Then I saw a policeman dragging a drunken man to the calaboose It 
was the Government in action 

I saw a ward alderman slip into an oflEce one morning and talk with a 
]udge Later in the day the judge dismissed a case against a pickpocket 



72 


  


who was a live ward worker for the alderman Again I saw this was 
the Government, doing things 

I saw militiamen level their rifles at a crowd of workingmen who were 
trying to get other workingmen to stay away from a shop where there 
was a strike on Government in action 

Everywhere I saw that Government is a thing made of men, that Gov- 
ernment has blood and bones, it is many mouths whispering into 
many ears, sending telegrams, aiming rifles, writing orders, saying 
"yes'' and "no" 

Government dies as the men who form it die and are laid away m their 
graves and the new Government that comes after is hpman, made 
of heartbeats of blood, ambitions, lusts, and money running through 
it all, money paid and money taken, and money covered up and 
spoken of with hushed voices 

A Government is just as secret and mysterious and sensitive as any 
human sinner carrying a load of germs, traditions and corpuscles 
handed down from fathers and mothers away back 


LANGUAGES 

There are no handles upon a language 
Whereby men take hold of it 
And mark it with signs for its remembrance 
It is a river, this language, 

Once in a thousand years 

Breaking a new course 

Changing its way to the ocean 

It is mountain effluvia 

Moving to valleys 

And from nation to nation 

Crossing borders and mixing 

Languages die like rivers 

Words wrapped round your tongue today 

And broken to shape of thought 

Between your teeth and lips speaking 

Now and today 

Shall be faded hieroglyphics 


CHICAGO POEMS 


73 


Ten thousand years from now 
Sing— and singing— remember 
Your song dies and changes 
And is not here tomorrow 
Any more than the wind 
Blowing ten thousand years ago 


LETTERS TO DEAD IMAGISTS 
Emily Dickinson 

You gave us the bumblebee who has a soul, 

The everlasting traveler among the hollyhocks, 

And how God plays around a back yard garden 

Stevie Crane 

War is kind and we never knew the kindness of war till you came, 
Nor the black riders and clashes of spear and shield out of the sea, 
Nor the mumblings and shots that nse from dreams on call 


SHEEP 

Thousands of sheep, soft-footed, black-nosed sheep— one by one going 
up the hill and over the fence— one by one four-footed pattering up and 
over— one by one wiggling their stub tails as they take the short jump 
and go over— one by one silently unless for the multitudinous drumming 
of their hoofs as they move on and go over— thousands and thousands of 
them in the gray haze of evening just after sundown— one by one slant- 
ing in a long line to pass over the hill— 

I am the slow, long-legged Sleepyman and I love you sheep m Persia, 
California, Argentina, Australia, or Spam— you are the thoughts that help 
me when I, the Sleepyman, lay my hands on the eyelids of the children 
of the world at eight o'clock every night— you thousands and thousands 
of sheep in a procession of dusk making an endless multitudinous drum 
ming on the hills with your hoofs 


74 


  


THE RED SON 

I LOVE your faces I saw the many years 
I drank your milk and filled my mouth 
With your home talk, slept in your house 
And was one of you 

But a fire burns in my heart 
Under the ribs where pulses thud 
And flitting between bones of skull 
Is the push, the endless mysterious command. 

Saying 

“I leave you behind— 

You for the little hills and the years all alike. 

You with your patient cows and old houses 
Protected from the rain, 

I am going away and I never come back to you. 
Crags and high rough places call me. 

Great places of death 

Where men go empty handed 

And pass over smiling 

To the star-drift on the horizon rim 

My last whisper shall be alone, unknown, 

I shall go to the city and fight against it. 

And make it give me passwords 

Of luck and love, women worth dying for. 

And money 

I go where you wist not of 
Nor I nor any man nor woman 
I only know I go to storms 
Grappling against things wet and naked ” 
There is no pity of it and no blame 
None of us is in the wrong 
After all it is only this 

You for the little hills and I go away 


CHICAGO POEMS 


75 


THE MIST 

I AM the mist, the impalpable mist, 
Back of the thing you seek 
My arms are long. 

Long as the reach of time and space 

Some toil and toil, believing. 

Looking now and again on my face. 
Catching a vital, olden glory 

But no one passes me, 

I tangle and snare them all 
I am the cause of the Sphinx, 

The voiceless, baffled, patient Sphinx 

I was at the first of things, 

I will be at the last 

I am the primal mist 
And no man passes me. 

My long impalpable arms 
Bar them all 


THE JUNK MAN 


I AM glad God saw Death 

And gave Death a job taking care of all who are tired of living 

When all the wheels in a clock are worn and slow and the connections 
loose 

And the clock goes on ticking and telling the wrong time from hour to 
hour 

And people around the house joke about what a bum clock it is. 

How glad the clock is when the big Junk Man dnves his wagon 
Up to the house and puts his arms around the clock and says 
“You don’t belong here, 


76 


  


You gotta come 
Along with me,” 

How glad the clock is then, when it feels the anns of the Junk Man close 
around it and carry it away 


SILVER NAILS 

A MAN was crucified He came to the city a stranger, was accused, and 
nailed to a cross He lingered hanging Laughed at the crowd “The nails 
are iron,” he said “You are cheap In my country when we crucify we use 
silver nails ” So he went )eenng They did not understand him at first 
Later they talked about him in changed voices in the saloons, bowling 
alleys, and churches It came over them every man is cracified only once 
in his life and the law of humanity dictates silver nails be used for the ]ob 
A statue was erected to him in a public square Not having gathered his 
name when he was among them, they wrote him as John Silvemail on the 
statue 


GYPSY 

I ASKED a gypsy pal 
To imitate an old image 
And speak old wisdom 
She drew in her chin. 

Made her neck and head 
The top piece of a Nile obelisk 
and said 

Snatch off the gag from thy mouth, child, 
And be free to keep silence 
Tell no man anything for no man listens. 
Yet hold thy lips ready to speak. 





TO 

JANET AND MARGARET 



,ers 


PRAIRIE 

I WAS bom on the prairie and the milk of its wheat, the red of its clover, 
the eyes of its women, gave me a song and a slogan 

Here the water went down, the icebergs slid with gravel, the gaps and 
the valleys hissed, and the black loam came, and the yellow sandy 
loam 

Here between the sheds of the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachians, 
here now a morning star fixes a fire sign over the timber claims and 
cow pastures, the com belt, the cotton belt, the cattle ranches 

Here the gray geese go five hundred miles and back with a wind under 
their wings honking the cry for a new home 

Here I know I will hanker after nothing so much as one more sunnse or a 
sky moon of fire doubled to a nver moon of water 

The praine sings to me in the forenoon and I know in the night I rest easy 
in the praine arms, on the prairie heart 

After the sunburn of the day 
handling a pitchfork at a hayrack, 
after the eggs and biscuit and coffee, 
the pearl-gray haystacks 
in the gloaming 
are cool prayers 
to the harvest hands 

In the city among the walls the overland passenger tram is choked and 
the pistons hiss and the wheels curse 

79 



So 


  


On the prame the overland flits on phantom wheels and the sky and 
the soil between them mufl3e the pistons and cheer the wheels 

I am here when the cities are gone 
I am here before the cities come 
I nourished the lonely men on horses 
I will keep the laughing men who nde iron 
I am dust of men 

The ranning water babbled to the deer, the cottontail, the gopher 
You came m wagons, making streets and schools. 

Km of the ax and rifle, km of the plow and horse. 

Singing Yankee Doodle, Old Dan Tucker, Turkey m the Straw, 

You m the coonskin cap at a log house door heanng a lone wolf howl. 
You at a sod house door reading the blizzards and chinooks let loose 
from Medicine Hat, 

I am dust of your dust, as I am brother and mother 
To the copper faces, the worker m flint and clay. 

The singing women and their sons a thousand years ago 
Marching single file the tunber and the plain 

I hold the dust of these amid changing stars. 

I last while old wars are fought, while peace broods mother-like. 

While new wars anse and the fresh killings of young men 
I fed the boys who went to France in great dark days 
Appomattox is a beautiful word to me and so is Valley Forge and the 
Marne and Verdun, 

I who have seen the red births and the red deaths 

Of sons and daughters, I take peace or war, I say nothing and wait 

Have you seen a red sunset dnp over one of my cornfields, the shore of 
night stars, the wave lines of dawn up a wheat valley? 

Have you heard my threshing crews yelling in the chaff of a strawpile 
and the running wheat of the wagonboards, my cornhuskers, my 
harvest hands hauling crops, singing dreams of women, worlds, 
horizons? 


Rivers cut a path on flat lands 
The mountains stand up 



CORNHUSKERS 


8i 


The salt oceans press in 
And push on the coast lines 
The sun, the wind, bnng rain 

And I know what the rainbow writes across the east or 
west in a half-circle 
A love-letter pledge to come again 

Towns on the Soo Line, 

Towns on the Big Muddy, 

Laugh at each other for cubs 
And tease as children 

Omaha and Kansas City, Minneapolis and St Paul, sisters in a house 
together, throwing slang, growing up 

Towns in the Ozarks, Dakota wheat towns, Wichita, Peoria, Buffalo, sis- 
ters throwing slang, growing up 

Out of prairie-brown grass crossed with a streamer of wigwam smoke- 
out of a smoke pillar, a blue promise— out of wild ducks woven in 
greens and purples— 

Here I saw a city rise and say to the peoples round the world Listen, I am 
strong, I know what I want 

Out of log houses and stumps— canoes stripped from tree-sides— flat- 
boats coaxed with an ax from the timber claims— in the years when 
the red and the white men met— the houses and streets rose 

A thousand red men cried and went away to new places for com and 
women a million white men came and put up skyscrapers, threw 
out rails and wires, feelers to the salt sea now the smokestacks bite 
the skyline with stub teeth 

In an early year the call of a wild duck woven in greens and purples 
now the riveter's chatter, the police patrol, the song-whistle of the 
steamboat 

To a man across a thousand years I offer a handshake 

I say to him Brother, make the story short, for the stretch of a thou- 
sand years is short 


82 


  


What brothers these in the dark? 

What eaves of skyscrapers against a smoke moon? 

These chimneys shaking on the lumber shanties 
When the coal boats plow by on the river— 

The hunched shoulders of the grain elevators— 

The flame sprockets of the sheet steel mills 
And the men in the rolling mills with their shirts off 
Playing their flesh arms against the twisting wrists of steel 
what brothers these 
in the dark 
of a thousand years? 

A headlight searches a snowstorm 

A funnel of white light shoots from over the pilot of the Pioneer Lim- 
ited crossing Wisconsin 

In the morning hours, in the dawn. 

The sun puts out the stars of the sky 
And the headlight of the Limited tram 

The fireman waves his hand to a country school teacher on a bobsled 
A boy, yellow hair, red scarf and mittens, on the bobsled, in his lunch 
box a pork chop sandwich and a V of gooseberry pie 

The horses fathom a snow to their knees 
Snow hats are on the rolling prairie hills. 

The Mississippi bluffs wear snow hats 


Keep your hogs on changing com and mashes of gram, 
O farmerman 

Cram their insides till they waddle on short legs 
Under the drums of bellies, hams of fat 
Kill your hogs with a knife slit under the ear 
Hack them with cleavers 
Hang them with hooks in the hind legs 

A wagonload of radishes on a summer morning 
Sprinkles of dew on the cnmson-purple balk 


CORNHUSKERS 


83 


The farmer on the seat dangles the reins on the rumps of dapple-gray 
horses 

The farmer's daughter with a basket of eggs dreams of a new hat to 
wear to the county fair 

On the left- and right-hand side of the road, 

Marching corn— 

I saw it knee high weeks ago — now it is head high— tassels of red silk 
creep at the ends of the ears 

I am the prairie, mother of men, waiting 

They are mine, the threshing crews eating beefsteak, the farmboys driv- 
ing steers to the railroad cattle pens 

They are mine, the crowds of people at a Fourth of July basket picnic, 
listening to a lawyer read the Declaration of Independence, watch- 
ing the pmwheels and Roman candles at night, the young men and 
women two by two hunting the bypaths and kissmg-bndges 

They are mine, the horses looking over a fence in the frost of late Octo- 
ber saying good morning to the horses hauling wagons of rutabaga 
to market 

They are mine, the old zigzag rail fences, the new barbwire 

The cornhuskers wear leather on their hands 

There is no let-up to the wind 

Blue bandanas are knotted at the mddy chins 

Falltime and winter apples take on the smolder of the five-o'clock No- 
vember sunset falltime, leaves, bonfires, stubble, the old things go, 
and the earth is grizzled 

The land and the people hold memories, even among the anthills and 
the angleworms, among the toads and woodroaches— among grave- 
stone writings rubbed out by the rain— they keep old things that 
never grow old 

The frost loosens cornhusks 

The sun, the ram, the wind 
loosen cornhusks 

The men and women are helpers 


84 


  


They are all comhuskers together 
I see them late in the western evening 
in a smoke-red dust 

The phantom of a yellow rooster flaunting a scarlet comb, on top of a 
dung pile crying hallelujah to the streaks of daylight, 

The phantom of an old hunting dog nosing in the underbrush for musk- 
rats, barking at a coon in a treetop at midnight, chewing a bone, 
chasing his tail round a corncrib. 

The phantom of an old workhorse taking the steel point of a plow 
across a forty-acre field in spnng, hitched to a harrow in summer, 
hitched to a wagon among comshocks in fall. 

These phantoms come into the talk and wonder of people on the front 
porch of a farmhouse late summer nights 
“The shapes that are gone are here,” said an old man with a cob pipe 
in his teeth one night in Kansas with a hot wind on the alfalfa 

Look at SIX eggs 

In a mockingbird's nest 

Listen to six mockingbirds 
Flinpng follies of O-be-joyful 
Over the marshes and uplands 

Look at songs 
Hidden in eggs 

When the morning sun is on the trumpet-vine blossoms, sing at the 
kitchen pans. Shout All Over God’s Heaven 
When the ram slants on the potato hills and the sun plays a silver shaft 
on the last shower, sing to the bush at the backyard fence Mighty 
Lak a Rose 

When the icy sleet pounds on the storm windows and the house lifts 
to a great breath, sing for the outside hills The Ole Sheep Done 
Know the Road, the Young Lambs Must Find the Way. 

Spnng slips back with a girl face calling always “Any new songs for 
me? Any new songs?” 



CORNHUSKERS 


85 


O prairie girl, be lonely, singing, dreaming, waiting—your lover comes— 
your child comes— the years creep with toes of April rain on new- 
turned sod 

O prairie girl, whoever leaves you only crimson poppies to talk with, 
whoever puts a good-by kiss on your lips and never comes back— 
There is a song deep as the falltime redhaws, long as the layer of black 
loam we go to, the shine of the morning star over the corn belt, 
the wave line of dawn up a wheat valley 

0 prairie mother, I am one of your boys 

1 have loved the prairie as a man with a heart shot full of pain over love 
Here I know I will hanker after nothing so much as one more sunrise 

or a sky moon of fire doubled to a river moon of water 

I speak of new cities and new people 
I tell you the past is a bucket of ashes 
I tell you yesterday is a wind gone down, 
a sun dropped m the west 
I tell you there is nothing in the world 
only an ocean of tomorrows, 
a sky of tomorrows 

I am a brother of the cornhuskers who say 
at sundown 

Tomorrow is a day 


RIVER ROADS 

Let the crows go by hawking their caw and caw 

They have been swimming in midnights of coal mines somewhere 

Let 'em hawk their caw and caw 

Let the woodpecker drum and drum on a hickory stump 
He has been swimming in red and blue pools somewhere hundreds of 
years 

And the blue has gone to his wings and the red has gone to his head 
Let his red head drum and drum 



86 


  


Let the dark pools hold the birds m a looking-glass 
And if the pool wishes, let it shiver to the blur of many wings, old swim 
mers from old places 

Let the redwing streak a line of vermilion on the green wood lines 
And the mist along the nver fix its purple m lines of a woman’s shawl 
on lazy shoulders 


PRAIRIE WATERS BY NIGHT 

Chatter of birds two by two raises a night song joining a litany of run- 
ning water— sheer waters showing the russet of old stones remem- 
benng many rams 

And the long willows drowse on the shoulders of the ranning water, 
and sleep from much music, joined songs of dav-end, feathery 
throats and stony waters, m a choir chanting new psalms 

It IS too much for the long willows when low laughter of a red moon 
comes down, and the willows drowse and sleep on the shoulders of 
the ranning water 


EARLY MOON 

The baby moon, a canoe, a silver papoose canoe, sails and sails m the 
Indian west. 

A nng of silver foxes, a mist of silver foxes, sit and sit around the Indian 
moon 

One yellow star for a runner, and rows of blue stars for more ranners, 
keep a line of watchers 

O foxes, baby moon, runners, you are the panel of memory, fire-white 
writing tonight of the Red Man’s dreams 

Who squats, legs crossed and arms folded, matching its look against 
the moon-face, the star-faces, of the West? 

Who are the Mississippi Valley ghosts, of copper foreheads, riding wiry 
ponies in the night’— no bridles, love-arms on the pony necks, nd- 
ing in the night a long old trail’ 

Why do they always come back when the silver foxes sit around the 
early moon, a silver papoose, in the Indian west’ 



CORNHUSKERS 


87 


LAUGHING CORN 

There was a high majestic fooling 
Day before yesterday in the yellow com. 

And day after tomorrow in the yellow com 
There will be high majestic fooling 

The ears npen in late summer 

And come on with a conquenng laughter, 

Come on with a high and conquering laughter 

The long-tailed blackbirds are hoarse 

One of the smaller blackbirds chitters on a stalk 

And a spot of red is on its shoulder 

And I never heard its name in my life 

Some of the ears are bursting 

A white juice works inside 

Cornsilk creeps in the end and dangles in the wind 

Always— I never knew it any other way— 

The wind and the corn talk things over together 
And the rain and the corn and the sun and the com 
Talk things over together 

Over the road is the farmhouse 

The siding is white and a green blind is slung loose 

It will not be fixed till the corn is husked 

The farmer and his wife talk things over together 


AUTUMN MOVEMENT 

I cauED over beautiful things knowing no beautiful thing lasts 

The field of cornflower yellow is a scarf at the neck of the copper suit 
burned woman, the mother of the year, the taker of seeds 


  


The northwest wind comes and the yellow is tom full of holes, new beau- 
tiful things come m the first spit of snow on the northwest wind, and 
the old things go, not one lasts 


FALLTIME 

GkiLD of a npe oat straw, gold of a southwest moon, 

Canada thistle blue and flimmenng larkspur blue. 

Tomatoes shining in the October sun with red hearts, 

Shining five and six in a row on a wooden fence, 

Why do you keep wishes on your faces all day long. 

Wishes like women with half-forgotten lovers going to new cities^ 

What IS there for you in the birds, the birds, the birds, crying down on the 
north wind in September, acres of birds spotting the air going south? 
Is there something finished? And some new beginning on the way? 


ILLINOIS FARMER 

Bury this old Illinois farmer with respect 

He slept the Illinois nights of his life after days of work in Illinois corn- 
fields 

Now he goes on a long sleep. 

The wind he listened to in the cornsilk and the tassels, the wind that 
combed his red beard zero mornings when the snow lay white on the 
yellow ears in the bushel basket at the comcnb. 

The same wind will now blow over the place here where his hands must 
dream of Ilhnois com 


HITS AND RUNS 

I REMEMBER the Chillicothc ball players grappling the Rock Island ball 
players m a sixteen-inning game ended by darkness 

And the shoulders of the Chilhcothe players were a red smoke against the 
sundown and the shoulders of the Rock Island players were a yellow 
smoke against the sundown. 

And the umpire's voice was hoarse calling balls and stakes and outs and 
the umpire's throat fought m the dust for a song 


CORNHUSKERS 


89 


VILLAGE IN LATE SUMMER 

Lips half-willing in a doorway 
Lips half-singing at a window 
Eyes half-dreaming in the walls 
Feet half-dancing in a kitchen 
Even the clocks half-yawn the hours 
And the farmers make half-answers 


BLIZZARD NOTES 

I don’t blame the kettle drums — they are hungry 

And the snare drums— I know what they want— they are empty too 

And the harnng booming bass dmms— they are hungriest of all 

The howling spears of the Northwest die down 

The lullabies of the Southwest get a chance, a mother song 

A cradle moon ndes out of a tom hole in the ragbag top of the sky 


SUNSET FROM OMAHA HOTEL WINDOW 

Into the blue nver hills 

The red sun runners go 

And the long sand changes 

And today is a goner 

And today is not worth haggling over 


Here in Omaha 
The gloaming is bitter 
As in Chicago 
Or Kenosha 


The long sand changes 
Today is a goner 

Time knocks in another brass nail 
Another yellow plunger shoots the dark 


90 


  


Constellations 
Wheeling over Omaha 
As in Chicago 
Or Kenosha 

The long sand is gone 

and all the talk is stars 
They circle in a dome over Nebraska 


STILL LIFE 

Cool your heels on the rail of an observation car 

Let the engineer open her up for ninety miles an hour 

Take in the praine nght and left, rolling land and new hay crops, swaths 
of new hay laid m the sun 

A gray village flecks by and the horses hitched m front of the post oflSice 
never blink an eye 

A barnyard and fifteen Holstein cows, dabs of white on a black wall map, 
never blink an eye 

\ signalman m a tower, the outpost of Kansas City, keeps his place at a 
window with the serenity of a bronze statue on a dark night when 
lovers pass whispering 


BAND CONCERT 

Band concert public square Nebraska city Flowing and circling dresses, 
summer-white dresses Faces, flesh tints flung like sprays of cherry 
blossoms And gigglers, God knows, gigglers, nvahng the pony whin- 
nies of the Livery Stable Blues 

Cowboy rags and nigger rags And boys driving sorrel horses hurl a corn- 
field laughter at the girls in dresses, summer-white dresses Amid the 
comet staccato and the tuba oompa, gigglers, God knows, gigglers 
daffy with life’s razzle dazzle. 

Slow good-night melodies and Home Sweet Home And the snare drum- 
mer bookkeeper m a hardware store nods hello to the daughter of a 


CORNHUSKERS 


91 


railroad conductor — a giggler, God knows, a giggler — and the summer- 
white dresses filter fanwise out of the public square 

The crushed strawbernes of ice cream soda places, the night wind in cot- 
tonwoods and willows, the lattice shadows of doorsteps and porches, 
these know more of the story 


THREE PIECES ON THE SMOKE OF AUTUMN 

Smoke of autumn is on it all 
The streamers loosen and travel 
The red west is stopped with a gray haze 
They fill the ash trees, they wrap the oaks. 

They make a long-tailed nder 

In the pocket of the first, the earliest evening star 

Three muskrats swim west on the Desplaines River 

There is a sheet of red ember glow on the nver, it is dusk, and the musk- 
rats one by one go on patrol routes west 

Around each slippery padding rat, a fan of ripples, in the silence of dusk a 
faint wash of npples, the padding of the rats going west, in a dark and 
shivering river gold 

(A newspaper in my pocket says the Germans pierce the Italian line, I have 
letters from poets and sculptors in Greenwich Village, I have letters 
from an ambulance man in France and an I W W man in Vladi- 
vostok ) 

I lean on an ash and watch the lights fall, the red ember glow, and three 
muskrats swim west in a fan of npples on a sheet of river gold 

Better the blue silence and the gray west. 

The autumn mist on the nver. 

And not any hate and not any love. 

And not anything at all of the keen and the deep 


92 


  


Only the peace of a dog head on a bam floor, 
And the new corn shoveled in bushels 
And the pumpkins brought from the corn rows, 
Umber lights of the dark. 

Umber lanterns of the loam dark 

Here a dog head dreams 
Not any hate, not any love 
Not anything but dreams 
Brother of dusk and umber 


LOCALITIES 

Wagon Wheel Gap is a place I never saw 

And Red Horse Gulch and the chutes of Cnpple Creek 

Red-shirted miners picking in the sluices. 

Gamblers with red neckties in the night streets. 

The fly-by-night towns of Bull Frog and Skiddoo, 

The night-cool limestone white of Death Valley, 

The straight drop of eight hundred feet 
From a shelf road in the Hasiampa Valley 
Men and places they are I never saw 

I have seen three White Horse taverns. 

One in Illmois, one in Pennsylvania, 

One in a timber-hid road of Wisconsin 

I bought cheese and crackers 

Between sun showers in a place called White Pigeon 

Nestling with a blacksmith shop, a post office. 

And a berry-crate factory, where four roads cross 

On the Pecatonica River near Freeport 
I have seen boys run barefoot in the leaves 
Throwing clubs at the walnut trees 
In the yellow-and-gold of autumn. 

And there was a brown mash dry on the inside of their hands 



CORNHUSKERS 


93 


On the Cedar Fork Creek of Knox County 

I know how the fingers of late October 

Loosen the hazel nuts 

I know the brown eyes of half-open hulls 

I knows boys named Lindquist, Swanson, Hildebrand 

I remember their cries when the nuts were npe 

And some are in machine shops, some are in the navy. 

And some are not on payrolls anywhere 

Their mothers are through waiting for them to come hc»ne 


CABOOSE THOUGHTS 

It’s going to come out all nght— do you know? 

The sun, the birds, the grass— they know 
They get along— and we’ll get along 

Some days will be rainy and you will sit waiting 
And the letter you wait for won’t come. 

And I will sit watching the sky tear off gray and gray 
And the letter I wait for won’t come 

There will be ac-ci-dents 

I know ac-ci-dents are coming 

Smash-ups, signals wrong, washouts, trestles rotten. 

Red and yellow ac-ci-dents 

But somehow and somewhere the end of the run 

The train gets put together again 

And the caboose and the green tail lights 

Fade down the right of way like a new white hope 

I never heard a mockingbird in Kentucky 
Spilling its heart in the morning. 

I never saw the snow on Chimborazo 
It’s a high white Mexican hat, I hear 


I never had supper with Abe Lincoln. 
Nor a dish of soup with Jim Hill 



94 


  


But I've been around 

I know some of the boys here who can go a little 
I know girls good for a burst of speed any time 

I heard Williams and Walker 
Before Walker died m the bughouse 

I knew a mandolin player 

Working in a barber shop in an Indiana town, 

And he thought he had a million dollars 

I knew a hotel girl m Des Moines 
She had eyes, I saw her and said to myself 
The sun nses and the sun sets in her eyes 
I was her steady and her heart went pit-a-pat 
We took away the money for a prize waltz at a Brotherhood dance 
She had eyes, she was safe as the bridge over the Mississippi at Burlington, 
I marned her 

Last summer we took the cushions going west 
Pike’s Peak is a big old stone, believe me 
It’s fastened down, something you can count on 

It’s going to come out all nght— do you know^ 

The sun, the birds, the grass— they know. 

They get along— and we’ll get along 


ALIX 

The mare Alix breaks the world’s trotting record one day I see her heels 
flash down the dust of an Illinois race track on a summer afternoon 
I see the timekeepers put their heads together over stop-watches, and 
call to the grand stand a split second is clipped off the old world’s 
record and a new world’s record fixed 

I see the mare Alix led away by men in undershirts and streaked faces 
Dnpping Alix in foam of white on the harness and shafts And the 
men in undershirts kiss her ears and mb her nose, and tie blankets on 
her, and take her away to have the sweat sponged 



CORNHUSKERS 


95 


I see the grand stand jammed with praine people yelling themselves hoarse 
Almost the grand stand and the crowd of thousands are one pair of 
legs and one voice standing up and yelling hurrah 

I see the driver of Alix and the owner smothered in a fury of handshakes, 
a mob of caresses I see the wives of the driver and owner smothered 
in a crush of white summer dresses and parasols 

Hours later, at sundown, gray dew creeping on the sod and sheds, I see 
Ahx again 

Dark, shining-velvet Ahx, 

Night-sky Ahx m a gray blanket. 

Led back and forth by a nigger 
Velvet and night-eyed Ahx 
With slim legs of steel 

And I want to lub my nose against the nose of the mare Alix 


POTATO BLOSSOM SONGS AND JIGS 

Rum tiddy um, 
tiddy um, 
tiddy um turn turn 

My knees are loose-hke, my feet want to sling their selves 
I feel like tickling you under the chin— honey—and a-askmg Why Does a 
Chicken Cross the Road? 

When the hens are a-laymg eggs, and the roosters pluck-pluck-put-akut 
and you— honey— put new potatoes and gravy on the table, and there 
ain't too much ram or too little 
Say, why do I feel so gabby? 

Why do I want to holler all over the place? 


Do you remember I held empty hands to you 
and I said all is yours 
the handfuls of nothing? 

I ask you for white blossoms 

I bring a concertina after sunset under the apple trees 
I bring out 'The Spanish Cavalier" and "In the Gloaming, 0 My Darling." 



96 


  


The orchard here is near and home-hke 

The oats m the valley run a mile 

Between are the green and marching potato vines 

The lightning bugs go criss-cross carrying a zigzag of fire the potato bugs 
are asleep under their stiff and yellow-striped wings here romance 
stutters to the western stars, “Excuse me 

Old foundations of rotten wood 

An old bam done-for and out of the wormholes ten-legged roaches shook 
up and scared by sunlight 

So a pickax digs a long tooth with a short memory 
Fire can not eat this rubbish till it has lain in tire sun 

The story lags 

The story has no connections 

The story is nothing but a lot of banjo plmka planka plunks 

The roan horse is young and will leam the roan horse buckles into harness 
and feels the foam on the collar at the end of a haul the roan horse 
points four legs to the sky and rolls m the red clover the roan horse 
has a rusty jag of hair between the ears hanging to a white star be- 
neonate the eyes 

In Burlington long ago 
And later again in Ashtabula 
I said to myself 

I wonder how far Ophelia went with Hamlet 
What else was there Shakespeare never told? 

There must have been something 

If I go bugs I want to do it like Ophelia 

There was class to the way she went out of her head 


Does a famous poet eat watermelon? 

Excuse me, ask me something easy 

I have seen farmhands with their faces in fned catfish on a Monday morn- 
ing 



CORNHUSKERS 


97 


And the Japanese, two-legged like us, 

The Japanese bring slices of watermelon into pictures 

The black seeds make oval polka dots on the pink meat 

Why do I always think of niggers and buck-and-wmg dancing whenever 
I see watermelon? 

Summer mornings on the docks I walk among bushel peach baskets piled 
ten feet high 

Summer mornings I smell new wood and the river wind along with 
peaches 

I listen to the steamboat whistle hong-hongmg, hong-honging across the 
town 

And once I saw a teameo straddling a street with a hay-rack load of melons 

Niggers play banjos because they want to 

The explanation is easy 

It is the same as why people pay fifty cents for tickets to a policemen's 
masquerade ball or a grocers-and-butchers' picnic with a fat man's 
foot race 

It is the same as why boys buy a nickers worth of peanuts and eat them 
and then buy another nickel's worth 

Newsboys shooting craps in a back alley have a fugitive understanding of 
the scientific principle involved 

The jockey in a yellow satin shirt and scarlet boots, riding a sorrel pony at 
the county fair, has a grasp of the theory. 

It IS the same as why boys go running lickety-split 
away from a school-room geography lesson 
in April when the crawfishes come out 
and the young frogs are calling 
and the pussywillows and the cat-tails 
know something about geography themselves 

I ask you for white blossoms 

I offer you memories and people 

I offer you a fire zigzag over the green and marching vines 

I bring a concertina after supper under the home-hke apple trees. 


98 


  


I make up songs about things to look at 

potato blossoms in summer night mist filling the garden with white 
spots, 

a cavalryman’s yellow silk handkerchief stuck m a flannel pocket over 
the left side of the shirt, over the ventricles of blood, over the 
pumps of the heart 

Bnng a concertina after sunset under the apple trees 

Let romance stutter to the western stars, '‘Excuse me ” 


LOAM 

In the loam we sleep. 

In the cool moist loam. 

To the lull of years that pass 
And the break of stars. 

From the loam, then. 

The soft warm loam. 

We rise 

To shape of rose leaf. 

Of face and shoulder 

We stand, then. 

To a whiff of life, 

Lifted to the silver of the sun 
Over and out of the loam 
A day 


MANITOBA CHILDE ROLAND 

Last night a January wind was ripping at the shingles over our house and 
whistling a wolf song under the eaves 

I sat m a leather rocker and read to a six-year-old girl the Browning po em , 
Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came 



CORNHUSKERS 


99 


And her eyes had the haze of autumn hills and it was beautiful to her 
and she could not understand 

A man is crossing a big prairie, says the poem, and nothing happens— and 
he goes on and on— and it’s all lonesome and empty and nobody 
home 

And he goes on and on— and nothing happens— and he comes on a 
horse’s skull, dry bones of a dead horse— and you know more than 
ever it’s all lonesome and empty and nobody home 

And the man raises a horn to his lips and blows— he fixes a proud neck 
and forehead toward the empty sky and the empty land— and blows 
one last wonder-cry 

And as the shuttling automatic memory of man clicks oflE its results 
willy-nilly and inevitable as the snick of a mouse-trap or the trajectory 
of a 42-centimeter projectile, 

I flash to the form of a man to his hips in snow drifts of Manitoba and 
Minnesota— in the sled derby run from Winnipeg to Minneapolis 

He IS beaten in the race the first day out of Winnipeg— the lead dog is 
eaten by four team mates— and the man goes on and on— running 
while the other racers ride— running while the other racers sleep— 

Lost in a blizzard twenty-four hours, repeating a circle of travel hour after 
hour— fighting the dogs who dig holes in the snow and whimper for 
sleep— pushing on— running and walking five hundred miles to the 
end of the race— almost a winner— one toe frozen, feet blistered 
and frost-bitten. 

And I know why a thousand young men of the Northwest meet him in 
the finishing miles and yell cheers— I know why judges of the race 
call him a winner and give him a special prize even though be is 
a loser 

I know he kept under his shirt and around his thudding heart amid the 
blizzards of five hundred miles that one last wonder-cry of Childe 
Roland— and I told the six-year-old girl all about it 


100 


  


And while the January wind was ripping at the shingles and whistling 
a wolf song under the eaves, her eyes had the haze of autumn hills 
and it was beautiful to her and she could not understand 


WILDERNESS 

There is a wolf in me fangs pointed for tearing gashes a red 

tongue for raw meat and the hot lapping of blood — I keep this 
wolf because the wilderness gave it to me and the wilderness will 
not let it go 

There is a fox in me a silver-gray fox I sniff and guess I 
pick things out of the wind and air I nose in the dark night and 
take sleepers and eat them and hide the feathers I circle and 
loop and double-cross 

There is a hog in me a snout and a bellv a machinery for 
eating and granting a machinery for sleeping satisfied in the 
sun— I got this too from the wilderness and the wilderness will not 
let it go 

There is a fish m me . . I know I came from salt-blue water-gates 
I scumed with shoals of hemng I blew waterspouts with por- 
poises . before land was before the water went down 
before Noah . before the first chapter of Genesis 

There is a baboon in me clambenng-clawed dog-faced 
yawping a galoot’s hunger hairy under the armpits here 
are the hawk-eyed hankenng men here are the blonde and blue- 
eyed women here they hide curled asleep waiting ready to 
snarl and kill ready to smg and give milk waiting— I keep 

the baboon because the wilderness says so 

There is an eagle in me and a mockingbird and the eagle flies among 
the Rocky Mountains of my dreams and fights among the Siena 
crags of what I want and the mockingbird warbles in the early 
forenoon before the dew is gone, warbles in the underbrush of my 
Chattanoogas of hope, gushes over the blue Ozark foothills of my 
wishes— And I got the eagle and the mockingbird from the wilderness. 



CORNHUSKERS 


101 


O, I got a ZOO, I got a menagene, inside my nbs, under my bony head, 
under my red-valve heart— and I got something else it is a man-child 
heart, a woman-child heart it is a father and mother and lover it 
came from God-Knows- Where it is going to God-Knows- Where— For 
I am the keeper of the zoo I say yes and no. I sing and kill and work 
I am a pal of the world I came from the wilderness 


CHICAGO POET 

I SALUTED a nobody 
I saw him m a looking-glass 
He smiled— so did I 
He crumpled the skin on his forehead, 
frowning— so did I 
Everything I did he did 
I said, “Hello, I know you ” 

And I was a liar to say so 

Ah, this looking-glass man' 

Liar, fool, dreamer, play-actor, 

Soldier, dusty drinker of dust— 

Ah' he will go with me 
Down the dark stairway 
When nobody else is looking. 

When everybody else is gone 

He locks his elbow m mine, 

I lose all— but not him 





102 


  


FIRE-LOGS 

Nancy Hanks dreams by the fire. 
Dreams, and the logs sputter, 

And the yellow tongues climb 
Red lines lick their way in flickers 
Oh, sputter, logs 

Oh, dream, Nancy 
Time now for a beautiful child 
Time now for a tall man to come 


REPETITIONS 

They are crying salt tears 
Over the beautiful beloved body 
Of Inez Milholland, 

Because they are glad she lived. 
Because she loved open-armed. 
Throwing love for a cheap thing 
Belonging to everybody — 

Cheap as sunlight. 

And morning air 


ADELAIDE CRAPSEY 

Among the bumblebees in red-top hay, a freckled field of brown-eyed 
Susans dnpping yellow leaves in July, 

I read your heart in a book 

And your mouth of blue pansy— I know somewhere I have seen it ram- 
shattered 

And I have seen a woman with her head flung between her naked knees, 
and her head held there listening to the sea, the great naked sea 
shouldering a load of salt 



CORNHUSKERS 


103 


And the blue pansy mouth sang to the sea 

Mother of God, I’m so little a thing. 

Let me sing longer. 

Only a little longer 

And the sea shouldered its salt in long gray combers hauling new shapes 
on the beach sand 


YOUNG BULLFROGS 

Jimmy Wimbledon listened a first week in June 
Ditches along prame roads of Northern Ilhnois 
Filled the arch of night with young bullfrog songs 
Infinite mathematical metronomic croaks rose and spoke. 
Rose and sang, rose m a choir of puzzles 
They made his head ache with nddles of music 
They rested his head with beaten cadence 
Jimmy Wimbledon listened 


MEMOIR OF A PROUD BOY 

He lived on the wings of storm 
The ashes are in Chihuahua 

Out of Ludlow and coal towns in Colorado 

Sprang a vengeance of Slav miners, Italians, Scots, Comishmen, Yanks 
Killings ran under the spoken commands of this boy 
With eighty men and nfles on a hogback mountain 

They killed sweanng to remember 
The shot and charred wives and children 
In the burnt camp of Ludlow, 

And Louis Tikas, the laughing Greek, 

Plugged with a bullet, clubbed with a gun butt 


As a home war 

It held the nation a week 




104 


  


And one or two million men stood together 
And swore by the retribution of steel 

It was all accidental 

He lived flecking lint off coat lapels 

Of men he talked with 

He bssed the miners’ babies 

And wrote a Denver paper 

Of picket silhouettes on a mountain line 

He had no mother but Mother Jones 

Crying from a jail window of Trinidad 

“All I want is room enough to stand 

And shake my fist at the enemies of the human race ” 

Named by a grand jury as a murderer 

He went to Chihuahua, foigot his old Scotch name, 

Smoked cheroots with Pancho Villa 

And wrote letters of Villa as a rock of the people 

How can I tell how Don Magregor went? 

Three riders emptied lead into him 

He lay on the mam street of an inland town. 

A boy sat near all day throwing stones 
To keep pigs away 

The Villa men buried him in a pit 
With twenty Carranzistas 

There is drama in that point 
the boy and the pigs 

GnfEth would make a movie of it to fetch sobs 

Victor Herbert would have the drams whirr 

In a weave with a high fiddle-stnng’s single clamor. 

“And the muchacho sat there all day throwing stones 
To keep the pigs away,” wrote Gibbons to the Tribune. 

Somewhere m Chihuahua or Colorado 
Is a leather bag of poems and short stones 


CORNHUSKERS 


105 


BILBEA 

{From tablet wnting, Babylonian excavations of 4th millennium B C) 

Bilbea, I was m Babylon on Saturday night 
I saw nothing of you anywhere 

I was at the old place and the other girls were there, but no Bilbea 

Have you gone to another house? or city? 

Why don’t you wnte? 

I was sorry I walked home half-sick 

Tell me how it goes 

Send me some kind of a letter 

And take care of yourself 


SOUTHERN PACIFIC 

Huntington sleeps in a house six feet long. 

Huntington dreams of railroads he built and owned 
Huntington dreams of ten thousand men saying Yes, sir 

Bhthery sleeps in a house six feet long 
Blithery dreams of rails and ties he laid 
Bhthery dreams of saying to Huntington Yes, sir 

Huntington, 

Blithery, sleep in houses six feet long 


WASHERWOMAN 

The washerwoman is a member of the Salvation Army 
And over the tub of suds rubbing underwear clean 
She sings that Jesus will wash her sins away 
And the red wrongs she has done God and man 
Shall be white as driven silfew 

Rubbing underwear she sings of the Last Great Washday. 


  


106 


PORTRAIT OF A MOTORCAR 

It’s a lean car a long-legged dog of a car a gray-ghost eagle 
car 

The feet of it eat the dirt of a road . the wings of it eat the hills 

Danny the driver dreams of it when he sees women in red skirts and red 
sox in his sleep 

It IS in Danny’s life and runs in the blood of him a lean gray-ghost 
car 


GIRL IN A CAGE 

Here in a cage the dollars come down 
To the click of a tube the dollars tumble. 
And out of a mouth the dollars run 

I finger the dollars. 

Paper and silver. 

Thousands a day 

Some days it’s fun 

to finger the dollars 

Some days 

the dollars keep on 
in a sob or a whisper: 

A flame of rose in the hair, 

A flame of silk at the throat. 


BUFFALO BILL 

Boy heart of Johnny Jones— achmg today? 
Aching, and Buffalo Bill in town? 

Buffalo Bill and ponies, cowboys, Indians? 

Some of us know 

All about it, Johnny Jones 


CORNHUSKEKS 


107 


Buffalo Bill IS a slanting look of the eyes, 

A slanting look under a hat on a horse 
He sits on a horse and a passing look is fixed 
On Johnny Jones, you and me, barelegged, 

A slanting, passing, careless look under a hat on a horse 

Go clickety-clack, O pony hoofs along the street 
Come on and slant your eyes again, O Buffalo Bill 
Give us again the ache of our boy hearts 

Fill us again with the red love of praines, dark nights, lonely wagons, and 
the crack-crack of rifles sputtenng flashes into an ambush 


SIXTEEN MONTHS 

On the lips of the child Janet float changing dreams 
It IS a thin spiral of blue smoke, 

A morning campfire at a mountain lake 

On the lips of the child Janet, 

Wisps of haze on ten miles of corn. 

Young light blue calls to young light gold of morning 


CHILD MARGARET 

The child Margaret begins to wnte numbers on a Saturday morning, the 
first numbers formed under her wishing child fingers 

All the numbers come well-bora, shaped m figures assertive for a frieze 
in a child’s room 

Both 1 and 7 are straightforward, military, filled with lunge and 
attack, erect in shoulder-straps 

The 6 and 9 salute as dancing sisters, elder and younger, and 2 
IS a trapeze actor swinging to handclaps 

All the numbers are well-bom, only 3 has a hump on its back and 8 
IS knock-kneed 

The child Margaret kisses all once and gives two hsses to 3 and 8 

(Each number is a bran-new rag doll . O in the wishing fingers 
millions of rag dolls, millions and milhons of new rag dollsi') 


io8 


  


SINGING NIGGER 

Your bony head, Jazbo, O dock walloper, 

Those grappling hooks, those wheelbarrow handlers, 

The dome and the wings of you, nigger. 

The red roof and the door of you, 

I know where your songs came from 

I know why God listens to your, “Walk All Over God’s Heaven ” 

I heard you shooting craps, “My baby’s going to have a new dress ” 

I heard you m the cinders, “I’m going to live anyhow until I die ” 

I saw five of you with a can of beer on a summer night and I listened to 
the five of you harmonizing six ways to sing, “Way Down Yonder 
in the Cornfield ” 

I went away asking where I come from 




LEATHER LEGGINGS 

They have taken the ball of earth 
and made it a little thing 

They were held to the land and horses, 
they were held to the httle seas 

They have changed and shaped and welded, 
they have broken the old tools and made 
new ones, they are rangmg the white 
scarves of cloudland; they are bumping 
the sunken bells of the Carthaginians 
and PhcBnicians 


CORNHUSKERS 


109 


they are handling 

the strongest sea 

as a thing to be handled 

The earth was a call that mocked, 

it IS belted with wires and meshed with 
steel, from Pittsburgh to Vladivostok is 
an iron ride on a moving house, from 
Jerusalem to Tokyo is a reckoned span, 
and they talk at night in the storm and 
salt, the wind and the war 

They have counted the miles to the Sun 
and Canopus, they have weighed a small 
blue star that comes m the southeast 
corner of the sky on a foretold errand. 

We shall search the sea again 
We shall search the stars again 
There are no bars across the way 
There is no end to the plan and the clue, 
the hunt and the thirst 
The motors are drumming, the leather leggings 
and the leather coats wait 

Under the sea 
and out to the stars 
we go 


PRAYERS OF STEEL 

Lay me on an anvil, O God 

Beat me and hammer me into a crowbar 

Let me pry loose old walls 

Let me lift and loosen old foundations 

Lay me on an anvil, O God 

Beat me and hammer me into a steel spike 

Drive me into the girders that hold a skyscraper together 


110 


  


Take red-hot nvets and fasten me into the central girders 
Let me be the great nail holding a skyscraper through blue nights into 
white stars 


ALWAYS THE MOB 

Jesus emptied the devils of one man into forty hogs and the hogs took 
the edge of a high rock and dropped off and down into the sea a 
mob 

The sheep on the hills of Australia, blundering four-footed in the sunset 
mist to the dark, they go one way, they hunt one sleep, they find 
one pocket of grass for all 

Karnak? Pyramids? Sphinx paws tall as a coolie? Tombs kept for kings 
and sacred cows? A mob 

Young roast pigs and naked dancing girls of Belshazzar, the room where 
a thousand sat guzzling when a hand wrote Mene, mcne, tekel, 
upharsm? A mob 

The honeycomb of green that won the sun as the Hanging Gardens of 
Nineveh, flew to its shape at the hands of a mob that followed the 
fingers of Nebuchadnezzar: a mob of one hand and one plan 

Stones of a circle of hills at Athens, staircases of a mountain in Peru, 
scattered clans of marble dragons in China each a mob on the rim 
of a sunrise, hammers and wagons have them now 

Locks and gates of Panama? The Union Pacific crossing deserts and tun- 
neling mountains? The Woolworth on land and the Titanic at sea? 
Lighthouses blinking a coast line from Labrador to Key West? Pig- 
iron bars piled on a barge whistling in a fog off Sheboygan? A mob 
hammers and wagons have them tomorrow 

The mob? A typhoon tearing loose an island from thousand-year moor- 
ings and bastions, shooting a volcanic ash with a fire tongue that 
licks up cities and peoples Layers of worms eating rocks and form- 
ing loam and valley floors for potatoes, wheat, watermelons 



CORNHUSKERS 


111 


The mob? A )ag of lightning, a geyser, a gravel mass loosening 

The mob kills or builds the mob is Attila or Genghis Khan, 
the mob is Napoleon, Lincoln. 

I am bom in the mob— I die in the mob— the same goes for you — I don’t 
care who you are 

I cross the sheets of fire in No Man’s Land for you, my brother— I slip a 
steel tooth into your throat, you my brother — I die for you and I 
kill you— It IS a twisted and gnarled thing, a crimson wool 

One more arch of stars, 

In the night of our mist. 

In the night of our tears 


JABBERERS 

I RISE out of my depths with my language 
You nse out of your depths with your language 

Two tongues from the depths. 

Alike only as a yellow cat and a green parrot are alike. 

Fling their staccato tantalizations 

Into a wildcat jabber 

Over a gossamer web of unanswerables 

The second and the third silence. 

Even the hundredth silence. 

Is better than no silence at all 

(Maybe this is a jabber too— are we at it again, you and I?) 

I nse out of my depths with my language. 

You nse out of your depths with your language 

One thing there is much of, the name men call it by is time, into this gulf 
our syllabic pronunciamentos empty by the way rockets of fire curve 
and are gone on the night sky, mto this gulf the jabbenngs go as the 
shower at a scissors grinder’s wheel 



112 


  


CARTOON 

I AM making a Cartoon of a Woman She is the People She is the Great 
Dirty Mother 

And Many Children hang on her Apron, crawl at her Feet, snuggle at her 
Breasts 


INTERIOR 

In the cool of the night time 
The clocks pick ofi the points 
And the mainspnngs loosen 
They will need winding 
One of these days . 

they will need winding 

Rabelais in red boards, 

Walt Whitman in green, 

Hugo in ten-cent paper covers, 

Here they stand on shelves 
In the cool of the night time 
And there is nothing . 

To be said against them . . 

Or for them . 

In the cool of the night time 
And the clocks 

A man in pigeon-gray pajamas 
The open window begins at his feet 
And goes taller than his head 
Eight feet high is the pattern 

Moon and mist make an oblong layout 
Silver at the man's bare feet. 

He swings one foot in a moon silver 
And it costs nothing 

One more day of bread and work. 

One more day . so much rags . . . 



CORNHUSKERS 


113 


The man barefoot in moon silver 
Mutters 'Tou'' and 'Tou'' 

To things hidden 

In the cool of the night time, 

In Rabelais, Whitman, Hugo, 

In an oblong of moon mist 

Out from the window prairielands 
Moon mist whitens a golf ground 
Whiter yet is a limestone quarry 
The crickets keep on chirring 

Switch engines of the Great Western 
Sidetrack box cars, make up trams 
For Weehawken, Oskaloosa, Saskatchewan, 
The cattle, the coal, the corn, must go 
In the night . . on the prairielands 

Chuff'Chuff go the pulses 

They beat in the cool of the night time 

Chuff-chuff and chuff-chuff 

These heartbeats travel the night a mile 

And touch the moon silver at the window 

And the bones of the man 

It costs nothing 

Rabelais in red boards. 

Whitman in green, 

Hugo in ten-cent paper covers, 

Here they stand on shelves 
In the cool of the night time 
And the clocks 


STREET WINDOW 

The pawn-shop man knows hunger. 

And how far hunger has eaten the heart 
Of one who comes with an old keepsake. 
Here are wedding rings and baby bracelets. 


114 


  


Scarf pins and shoe buckles, jeweled garters, 
Old-fashioned knives with inlaid handles, 
Watches of old gold and silver. 

Old coins worn with finger-marks 
They tell stories 


PALLADIUMS 

In the newspaper office— who are the spooks? 

Who wears the mythic coat invisible? 

Who pussyfoots from desk to desk 

with a speaking forefinger? 
Who gumshoes amid the copy paper 

with a whispering thumb? 

Speak softly— the sacred cows may hear 
Speak easy— the sacred cows must be fed 


CLOCKS 

Here is a face that says half-past seven the same way whether a murder or 
a wedding goes on, whether a funeral or a picnic crowd passes 
A tall one I know at the end of a hallway broods m shadows and is watch- 
ing booze eat out the insides of the man of the house, it has seen five 
hopes go in five years one woman, one child, and three dreams 
A little one earned in a leather box by an actress rides with her to hotels 
and IS under her pillow m a sleeping-car between one-night stands 
One hoists a phiz over a railroad station, it points numbers to people a 
quarter-mile away who believe it when other clocks fail 
And of course there are wnst watches over the pulses of airmen eager 
to go to France 


CORNHUSKERS 


1^5 


LEGENDS 

CLOWNS DYING 

Five circus clowns dying this year, morning newspapers told their lives, 
how each one horizontal in a last gesture of hands arranged by an 
undertaker, shook thousands into convulsions of laughter from behind 
rouge-red lips and powder-white face 

STEAMBOAT BILL 

When the boilers of the Robert E Lee exploded, a steamboat winner of 
many races on the Mississippi went to the bottom of the river and 
never again saw the wharves of Natchez and New Orleans 

And a legend lives on that two gamblers were blown toward the sky and 
during their journey laid bets on which of the two would go higher 
and which would be first to set foot on the turf of the earth again 

FOOT AND MOUTH PLAGUE 

When the mysterious foot and mouth epidemic ravaged the cattle of 
Illinois, Mrs Hector Smith wept bitterly over the government killing 
forty of her soft-eyed Jersey cows, through the newspapers she wept 
over her loss for millions of readers in the Great Northwest 

SEVENS 

The lady who has had seven lawful husbands has written seven years for 
a famous newspaper telling how to find love and keep it seven thou- 
sand hungry girls m the Mississippi Valley have read the instructions 
seven years and found neither illicit loves nor lawful husbands 

PROFITEER 

I who saw ten strong young men die anonymously, I who saw ten old 
mothers hand over their sons to the nation anonymously, I who saw 
ten thousand touch the sunlit silver finalities of undistinguished hu- 
man glory— why do I sneeze sardonically at a bronze drinking foun- 
tain named after one who participated in the war vicariously and 
bought ten farms^ 



  


116 


PSALM OF THOSE WHO GO FORTH BEFORE DAYLIGHT 

The policeman buys shoes slow and careful, the teamster buys gloves slow 
and careful, they take care of their feet and hands, they live on then 
feet and hands 

The millcman never argues, he works alone and no one speaks to him, the 
city IS asleep when he is on the )ob, he puts a bottle on si\ hundred 
porches and calls it a day’s work, he climbs two hundred wooden 
stairways, two horses are company for him, he never argues 

The rolling-mill men and the sheet-steel men are brothers of cinders, they 
empty cinders out of their shoes after the day’s W'ork, they ask their 
wives to fix burnt holes in the knees of their trousers, their necks and 
ears are covered with a smut, they scour their necks and ears, they are 
brothers of cinders 


HORSES AND MEN IN RAIN 

Let us sit by a hissing steam radiator a winter’s day, gray wind pattering 
frozen raindrops on the window. 

And let us talk about milk wagon dnvers and grocery delivery boys 

Let us keep our feet in wool slippers and mix hot punches— and talk about 
mail carriers and messenger bo}^ slipping along the icy sidewalks 

Let us write of olden, golden days and hunters of the Holy Grail and men 
called “knights” riding horses in the ram, m the cold frozen rain for 
ladies they loved 

A roustabout hunched on a coal wagon goes by, icicles drip on his hat rim, 
sheets of ice wrapping the hunks of coal, the caravanserai a gray blur 
in slant of ram 

Let us nudge the steam radiator with our wool slippers and write poems 
of Launcelot, the hero, and Roland, the hero, and all the olden golden 
men who rode horses in the ram 


CORNHUSKERS 


117 


QUESTIONNAIRE 

Have I told any man to be a liar for my sake^ 

Have I sold ice to the poor m summer and coal to the poor in winter for 
the sake of daughters who nursed brindle bull terriers and led with 
a leash their dogs clothed in plaid wool jackets? 

Have I given any man an earful too much of my talk— or asked any man 
to take a snootful of booze on my account? 

Have I put wool m my own ears when men tried to tell me what was good 
for me? Have I been a bum listener? 

Have I taken dollars from the living and the unborn while I made speeches 
on the retributions that shadow the heels of the dishonest? 

Have I done any good under cover? Or have I always put it m the show 
windows and the newspapers? 


NEAR KEOKUK 

Thirty-tw^o Greeks are dipping their feet in a creek 
Sloshing their bare feet in a cool flow of clear water 
All one midsummer day ten hours the Greeks 

stand in leather shoes shoveling gravel 
Now they hold their toes and ankles 

to the drift of running water 
Then they go to the bunk cars 

and eat mulligan and prune sauce, 
Smoke one or two pipefuls, look at the stars, 
tell smutty stones 

About men and women they have known, 
countries they have seen. 

Railroads they have built— 

and then the deep sleep of children. 


  


118 


SLANTS AT BUFFALO, NEW YORK 

A FOREFINGER of stonc, dreamed by a sculptor, points to the sky 
It says This way' this way' 

Four lions snore in stone at the corner of the shaft 
They too are the dream of a sculptor 
They too say This way' this way' 

The street cars swing at a curve 

The middle-class passengers witness low life 

The car windows frame low life all day in pictures 

Two Italian cellar delicatessens 

sell red and green peppers 
The Flonda bananas furnish a burst of yellow 
The lettuce and the cabbage give a green 

Boys play marbles in the cinders 

The boys’ hands need washing 

The boys are glad, they fight among each other 

A plank bndge leaps the Lehigh Valley railroad. 

Then acres of steel rails, freight cars, smoke. 

And then the blue lake shore 

Ene with Norse blue eyes and the white sun 


FLAT LANDS 

Flat lands on the end of town where real estate men are crying new sub- 
divisions. 

The sunsets pour blood and fire over you hundreds and hundreds of nights, 
flat lands — ^blood and fire of sunsets thousands of years have been 
pounng over you 

And the stars follow the sunsets One gold star A shower of blue stars 
Blurs of white and gray stars Vast marching processions of stars arch- 
ing over you flat lands where frogs sob this April night 

“Lots for Sale— Easy Terms” run letters painted on a board— and the stars 
wheel onward, the frogs sob this April night. 


CORNHUSKERS 


119 


LAWYER 

When the jury files in to deliver a verdict after weeks of direct and cross 
examinations, hot clashes of lawyers and cool decisions of the judge, 
There are points of high silence — twiddling of thumbs is at an end— bailiffs 
near cuspidors take fresh chews of tobacco and wait — and the clock 
has a chance for its ticking to be heard 
A lawyer for the defense clears his throat and holds himself ready if the 
word IS “Guilty” to enter motion for a new trial, speaking in a soft 
voice, speaking in a voice slightly colored with bitter wrongs mingled 
with monumental patience, speaking with mythic Atlas shoulders of 
many preposterous, unjust circumstances 


THREE BALLS 

Jabowsky’s place is on a side street and only the ram washes the dusty 
three balls 

When I passed the window a month ago, there rested in proud isolation 

A family bible with hasps of brass twisted off, a wooden clock with pendu- 
lum gone. 

And a porcelain crucifix with the glaze nicked where the left elbow of 
Jesus IS represented 

I passed today and they were all there, resting in proud isolation, the clock 
and the crucifix saying no more and no less than before, and a yellow 
cat sleeping in a patch of sun alongside the family bible with the 
hasps off 

Only the ram washes the dusty three balls in front of Jabowsky’s place on 
a side street 


CHICKS 

The chick in the egg picks at the shell, cracks open one oval world, and 
enters another oval world 

“Cheep cheep cheep” is the salutation of the newcomer, the 

emigrant, the casual at the gates of the new world 

“Cheep cheep” from oval to oval, sunset to sunset, star to star 


120 


  


It IS at the door of this house, this teeny weeny eggshell exit, it is here 
men say a riddle and jeer each other who are you? where do you go 
from here? 

(In the academies many books, at the circus many sacks of peanuts, at the 
club rooms many cigar butts ) 

“Cheep cheep” from oval to oval, sunset to sunset, star to star 


HUMDRUM 

If I had a million lives to live 
and a million deaths to die 
in a million humdrum worlds, 

Fd hke to change my name 

and have a new house number to go by 
each and every time I died 
and started life all over again 

I wouldn’t want the same name every time 
and the same old house number always, 
dying a million deaths, 
dying one by one a million times 
—would you? 

or you? 

or you? 


JOLIET 

On the one hand the steel works 
On the other hand the penitentiary. 
Santa F6 trains and Alton trams 
Between smokestacks on the west 
And gray walls on the east 
And Lockport down the river 

Part of the valley is God’s 
And part is man’s 



CORNHUSKERS 


121 


The river course laid out 
A thousand years ago 
The canals ten years back 

The sun on two canals and one river 
Makes three stripes of silver 
Or copper and gold 
Or shattered sunflower leaves 
Talons of an iceberg 
Scraped out this valley 
Claws of an avalanche loosed here 


KNUCKS 

In Abraham Lincoln's city. 

Where they remember his lawyer's shingle, 

The place where they brought him 
Wrapped m battle flags. 

Wrapped m the smoke of memories 
From Tallahassee to the Yukon, 

The place now where the shaft of his tomb 
Points white against the blue prairie dome, 

In Abraham Lincoln's city I saw knucks 

In the window of Mister Fischman's second-hand store 

On Second Street 

I went in and asked, '"How much?" 

''Thirty cents apiece," answered Mister Fischman 
And taking a box of new ones off a shelf 
He filled anew the box in the showcase 
And said incidentally, most casually 
And incidentally 

"I sell a carload a month of these " 

I slipped my fingers into a set of knucks. 

Cast-iron knucks molded m a foundry pattern. 

And there came to me a set of thoughts like these 
Mister Fischman is for Abe and the "malice to none" stuff. 


122 


  


And the street car strikers and the stnke-breakers. 
And the sluggers, gunmen, detectives, policemen. 
Judges, utility heads, newspapers, priests, lawyers, 
They are all for Abe and the “malice to none” stuff 

I started for the door 
“Maybe you want a lighter pair,” 

Came Mister Fischman’s voice 
I opened the door and the voice again 
“You are a funny customer ” 

Wrapped m battle flags, 

Wrapped in the smoke of memories. 

This IS the place they brought him. 

This is Abraham Lincoln’s home town 


TESTAMENT 

I GIVE the undertakers permission to haul my body 
to the graveyard and to lay away all, the head, the 
feet, the hands, all I know there is something left 
over they can not put away 

Let the nanny goats and the billy goats of the shanty 
people eat the clover over my grave and if any yellow 
hair or any blue smoke of flowers is good enough to grow 
over me let the dirty-fisted children of the shanty 
people pick these flowers 

I have had my chance to live with the people who have 
too much and the people who have too little and I chose 
one of the two and I have told no man why 


VALLEY SONG 


Your eyes and the valley are memones 
Your eyes fire and the valley a bowl 
It was here a moonnse crept over the timberlme 
It was here we turned the coffee cups upside down. 
And your eyes and the moon swept the valley 

I will see you again tomorrow 
I will see you again in a million years 
I will never know your dark eyes again 
These are three ghosts I keep 
These are three sumach-red dogs I run with 

All of it wraps and knots to a nddle 
I have the moon, the timberlme, and you. 

All three are gone— and I keep all three 


IN TALL GRASS 

Bees and a honeycomb in the dned head of a horse in a pasture comer— 
a skull m the tall grass and a buzz and a buzz of the yellow honey- 
hunters 

And I ask no better a winding sheet 

(over the earth and under the sun) 

Let the bees go honey-hunting with yellow blur of wings in the dome of 
my head, in the rumbling, singing arch of my skull 





124 


  


Let there be wings and yellow dust and the drone of dreams of honey— 
who loses and remembers?— who keeps and forgets? 

In a blue sheen of moon over the bones and under the hanging honey- 
comb the bees come home and the bees sleep 


UPSTAIRS 

I TOO have a garret of old playthings 
I have tin soldiers with broken arms upstairs 
I have a wagon and the wheels gone upstairs 
I have guns and a drum, a ]umpmg-)ack and a magic lantern 
And dust is on them and I never look at them upstairs 
I too have a garret of old playthings 


MONOSYLLABIC 

Let me be monosyllabic today, O Lord. 

Yesterday I loosed a snarl of words on a fool, 
on a child 

Today, let me be monosyllabic . . a crony of old men 
who wash sunlight m their fingers and 
enjoy slow-pacing clocks 


FILMS 

I HAVE kept all, not one is thrown away, not one given to the ragman, not 
one thrust in a corner with a “P-f-f ” 

The red ones and the blue, the long ones in stripes, and each of the little 
black and white checkered ones 

Keep them I tell my heart keep them another year, another ten years 
they will be wanted again 

They came once, they came easy, they came like a first white fluiry of 
snow in late October, 

Like any sudden, presumptuous, beautiful thing, and they were cheap at 
the pnee, cheap like snow 


CORNHUSKERS 


12 $ 


Here a red one and there a long one in yellow stripes, 

O there shall be no ragman have these yet a year, yet ten years 


KREISLER 

Sell me a violin, mister, of old mystenous wood 

Sell me a fiddle that has kissed dark nights on the forehead where men 
kiss sisters they love 

Sell me dried wood that has ached with passion clutching the knees and 
arms of a storm 

Sell me horsehair and rosin that has sucked at the breasts of the morning 
sun for milk 

Sell me something crushed in the heartsblood of pain readier than ever 
for one more song 


THE SEA HOLD 


The sea is large 

The sea hold on a leg of land m the Chesapeake hugs an early sunset and 
a last morning star over the oyster beds and the late clam boats of 
lonely men 

Five white houses on a half-mile strip of land five white dice rolled 
from a tube 

Not so long ago the sea was large 

And today the sea has lost nothing it keeps all 

I am a loon about the sea 

I make so many sea songs, I cry so many sea cries, I forget so many sea 
songs and sea cries 

I am a loon about the sea 

So are five men I had a fish fry with once in a tar-paper shack trembling 
in a sand storm 

The sea knows more about them than they know themselves 

They know only how the sea hugs and will not let go 


The sea is large 

The sea must know more than any of us 


126 


  


GOLDWING MOTH 

A GOLDwmc moth is between the scissors and the ink bottle on the desk 
Last night it flew hundieds of circles around a glass bulb and a flame wire 
The wings are a soft gold, it is the gold of illuminated initials in manu- 
scripts of the medieval monks 


LOIN CLOTH 

Body of Jesus taken down from the cross 
Carved m ivory by a lover of Christ, 

It is a child's handful you are here, 

The breadth of a man’s finger, 

And this ivory loin cloth 

Speaks an mterspersal in the day’s work. 

The carver’s prayer and whim 

And Christ-love 


HEMLOCK AND CEDAR 

Thin sheets of blue smoke among white slabs near the shingle mill 
winter morning 

Falling of a dry leaf might be heard circular steel tears through a 
log 

Slope of woodland brown soft tinge of blue such as pansy 
eyes 

Farther, field fires funnel of yellow smoke spellings of other 
yellow in com stubble 

Bobsled on a down-hill road Febmary snow mud . . . horses steam- 
ing Oscar the dnver sings ragtime under a spot of red seen a 

mile the red wool yam of Oscar’s stocking cap is seen from the 
shingle mill to the ndge of hemlock and cedar 



COR NHUSKERS 


127 


SUMMER SHIRT SALE 

The summer shirt sale of a downtown haberdasher is glonfied m a show- 
window slang everybody understands the language red dots, yellow 
circles, blue anchors, and dove-brown hooks, these perform explosions in 
color stripes and checks fight for the possession of front lines and salients 
detectives, newsies, teameoes, niggers, all stop, look, and listen the shirt 
sale and the show window kick at the street with a noise joyous as a clog 
dancer the ensemble is a challenge to the ghost who walks on paydays 


MEDALLION 

The brass medallion profile of your face I keep always 
It IS not Jingling with loose change in my pockets 
It IS not stuck up in a show place on the oflEce wall 
I carry it in a special secret pocket m the day 
And it IS under my pillow at night 

The brass came from a long ways off it was up against hell and high water, 
fire and flood, before the face was put on it 
It IS the side of a head, a woman wishes, a woman waits, a woman swears 
behind silent lips that the sea will bring home what is gone 


BRICKLAYER LOVE 

I THOUGHT of killing myself because I am only a bncklayer and you a 
woman who loves the man who rans a drug store 

I don't care like I used to, I lay bncks straighter than I used to and I sing 
slower handling the trowel afternoons 

When the sun is in my eyes and the ladders are shaky and the mortar 
boards go wrong, I think of you 


128 


  


ASHURNATSIRPAL III 
(From Babylonian tablet, 4,000 years Before Christ) 

Three walls around the town of Tela when I came 
They expected everything of those walls, 

Nobody in the town came out to kiss my feet 

I knocked the walls down, killed three thousand soldiers. 
Took away cattle and sheep, took all the loot in sight. 
And burned special captives 

Some of the soldiers— I cut off hands and feet 
Others— I cut off ears and fingers 
Some — I put out the eyes 
I made a pyramid of heads 
I strung heads on trees circling the town. 

When I got through with it 

There wasn’t much left of the town of Tela 


MAMMY HUMS 

This is the song I rested with 

The nght shoulder of a strong man I leaned on 

The face of the ram that dnzzled on the short neck of a canal boat 

The eyes of a child who slept while death went over and under 

The petals of peony pmk that fluttered in a shot of wind come and gone 

This IS the song I rested with 

Head, heels, and fingers rocked to the nigger mammy humming of it, to 
the mile-off steamboat landing whistle of it 

The murmurs ran with bees’ wings 

m a late summer sun 
They go and come with white surf 

slamming on a beach all day 


CORNHUSKERS 


129 


Get this 

And then you may sleep with a late afternoon slumber sun 

Then you may slip your head m an elbow knowing nothing — only sleep 

If so you sleep m the house of our song, 

If so you sleep under the apple trees of our song, 

Then the face of sleep must be the one face you were looking for 


BRINGERS 

Cover me over 

In dusk and dust and dreams 

Cover me over 
And leave me alone 

Cover me over, 

You tireless, great 

Hear me and co\ex me, 

Brmgers of dusk and dust and dreams. 


CRIMSON RAMBLER 

Now that a crimson rambler 

begins to crawl over the house 
of our two lives— 

Now that a red curve 

winds across the shingles— 

Now that hands 

washed in early sunnses 
climb and spill scarlet 
on a white lattice weave — 

Now that a loop of blood 
IS written on our roof 
and reaching around a chimney— 


130 


  


How are the two lives of this house 

to keep strong hands and strong hearts? 


HAUNTS 

There are places I go when I am strong 
One IS a marsh pool where I used to go 

with a long-ear hound-dog 
One is a wild crabapple tree, I was there 
a moonlight night with a girl 
The dog IS gone, the girl is gone, I go to these 

places when there is no other place to go. 


HAVE ME 

Have me in the blue and the sun 

Have me on the open sea and the mountains 

When I go into the grass of the sea floor, I will go alone 
This is where I came from— the chlorine and the salt are blood and bones 
It is here the nostrils rash the air to the lungs It is here oxygen clamors 
to be let m 

And here in the root grass of the sea floor I will go alone 

Love goes far Here love ends 
Have me in the blue and the sun. 


FIRE DREAMS 

(Written to be read aloud, if so be. Thanksgiving Day) 

I REMEMBER here by the fire, 

In the flickenng reds and saffrons, 

They came m a ramshackle tub. 

Pilgrims in tall hats, 

Pilgnms of iron jaws. 

Drifting by weeks on beaten seas. 

And the random chapters say 
They were glad and sang to God 


CORNHUSKERS 


^3^ 


And so 

Since the iron-jawed men sat down 
And said, 'Thanks, O God,’' 

For life and soup and a little less 
Than a hobo handout today. 

Since gray winds blew gray patterns of sleet on Plymouth Rock, 
Since the iron-jawed men sang "Thanks, O God,” 

You and I, O Child of the West, 

Remember more than ever 
November and the hunter s moon, 

November and the yellow-spotted hills 

And so 

In the name of the iron-jawed men 
I will stand up and say yes till the finish is come and gone 
God of all broken hearts, empty hands, sleeping soldiers, 

God of all star-flung beaches of night sky, 

I and my love-child stand up together today and sing 'Thanks, O 
God ” 


BABY FACE 

White Moon comes in on a baby face 
The shafts across her bed are flimmering 

Out on the land White Moon shines. 

Shines and glimmers against gnarled shadows, 

All silver to slow twisted shadows 

Falling across the long road that runs from the house 

Keep a little of your beauty 
And some of your flimmering silver 
For her by the window tonight 
Where you come in. White Moon 


THE YEAR 

I 

A STORM of white petals. 

Buds throwing open baby fists 
Into hands of broad flowers 




132 


COMPLEIE POEMS 


II 

Red roses running upward, 
Clambering to the clutches of life 
Soaked in crimson 

III 

Rabbles of tattered leaves 
Holding golden flimsy hopes 
Against the tramphngs 
Into the pits and gullies 

IV 

Hoarfrost and silence 
Only the muffling 
Of winds dark and lonesome— 
Great lullabies to the long sleepers 


DRUMNOTES 

Days of the dead men, Danny 

Drum for the dead, drum on your 
remembering heart 

Jaures, a great love-heart of France, 
a slug of lead in the red valves 

Kitchener of Khartoum, tall, cold, proud, 
a shark's mouthful 

Franz Josef, the old man of forty haunted 
kingdoms, m a tomb with the Hapsburg 
fathers, moths eating a green uniform 
to tatters, worms taking all and leaving 
only bones and gold buttons, bones and 
iron crosses 

Jack London, Jim Riley, Verhaeren, riders to 
the republic of dreams 

Days of the dead, Danny 

Drum on your remembering heart 

* Copyright, Dodd, Mead & Co 


CORNHUSKERS 


^33 


MOONSET 

Leaves of poplars pick Japanese prints against the west. 

Moon sand on the canal doubles the changing pictures 
The moon's good-by ends pictures 
The west is empty All else is empty No moon-talk at all now 
Only dark listening to dark 


GARDEN WIRELESS 

How many feet ran with sunlight, water, and air^ 

What little devils shaken of laughter, cramming their little ribs with 
chuckles. 

Fixed this lone red tulip, a woman's mouth of passion kisses, a nun's 
mouth of sweet thinking, here topping a straight line of green, a pillar 
stem^ 

Who hurled this bomb of red caresses^— nodding balloon-film shooting its 
wireless every fraction of a second these June days 
Love me before I die. 

Love me— love me now 


HANDFULS 

Blossoms of babies 
Blinking their stories 
Come soft 

On the dusk and the babble. 
Little red gamblers. 

Handfuls that slept in the dust 

Summers of rain. 

Winters of drift. 

Tell off the years. 




^34 


  


And they go back 
Who came soft— 
Back to the sod, 

To silence and dust, 
Gray gamblers. 
Handfuls again 


COOL TOMBS 

When Abraham Lincoln was shoveled into the tombs, he forgot the cop- 
perheads and the assassin in the dust, in the cool tombs 

And Ulysses Grant lost all thought of con men and Wall Street, cash and 
collateral turned ashes in the dust, in the cool tombs 

Pocahontas' body, lovely as a poplar, sweet as a red haw in November or 
a pawpaw m May, did she wonder^ does she remembei^ in the 
dust, in the cool tombs^ 

Take any streetful of people buying clothes and groceries, cheering a hero 
or throwing confetti and blowing tin horns tell me if the lovers 
are losers tell me if any get more than the lovers in the 
dust in the cool tombs 


.enaiK 


SHENANDOAH 

In the Shenandoah Valley, one rider gray and one rider blue, and the sun 
on the riders wondering 

Plied m the Shenandoah, riders blue and riders gray, piled with shovels, 
one and another, dust in the Shenandoah taking them quicker than 
mothers take children done with play 

The blue nobody remembers, the gray nobody remembers, it’s all old and 
old nowadays in the Shenandoah 

• • • 

And all is young, a butter of dandelions slung on the turf, climbing blue 
flowers of the wishing woodlands wondenng a midnight purple violet 
claims the sun among old heads, among old dreams of repeating heads 
of a rider blue and a rider gray m the Shenandoah 


NEW FEET 

Empty battlefields keep their phantoms 
Grass crawls over old gun wheels 
And a nodding Canada thistle flings a purple 
Into the summer’s southwest wind. 

Wrapping a root in the rust of a bayonet. 
Reaching a blossom in mst of shrapnel 



136 


  


OLD OSAWATOMIE 

John Brown's body under the morning stars 
Six feet of dust under the morning stars 
And a panorama of war performs itself 
Over the six-foot stage of circling armies 
Room for Gettysburg, Wilderness, Chickamauga, 
On a six-foot stage of dust 


GRASS 

Pile the bodies high at Austerlitz and Waterloo 
Shovel them under and let me work— 

I am the grass, I cover all 

And pile them high at Gettysburg 
And pile them high at Ypies and Verdun 
Shovel them under and let me work 
Two years, ten years, and passengers ask the conductor 
What place is this^ 

Where are we now^ 

I am the grass 
Let me work 


FLANDERS 

Flanders, the name of a place, a country of people, 

Spells itself with letters, is written in books 

'Where is Flanders^" was asked one time, 

Flanders known only to those who lived there 

And milked cows and made cheese and spoke the home language 

'Where is Flanders?” was asked 

And the slang adepts shot the reply Search me 


CORNHUSKERS 


^37 


A few thousand people milking cows, raising radishes. 

On a land of salt grass and dunes, sand-swept with a sea-hreath on it 
This was Flanders, the unknown, the quiet, 

The place where cows hunted lush cuds of green on lowlands, 

And the raw-boned plowmen took horses with long shanks 
Out in the dawn to the sea-breath 

Flanders sat slow-spoken amid slow-sw^ung windmills. 

Slow-circling windmill arms turning north or west, 

Turning to talk to the swaggering winds, the childish winds. 

So Flanders sat with the heart of a kitchen girl 
Washing wooden bowls m the winter sun by a window 


GARGOYLE 

I SAW a mouth jeering A smile of melted red iron ran over it Its laugh was 
full of nails rattling It was a child's dream of a mouth 
A fist hit the mouth knuckles of gun-metal driven by an electric wrist 
and shoulder It was a child's dream of an arm 
The fist hit the mouth over and over, again and again The mouth bled 
melted iron, and laughed its laughter of nails rattling 
And I saw the more the fist pounded the more the mouth laughed The 
fist is pounding and pounding, and the mouth answering 


OLD TIMERS 

I AM an ancient reluctant conscript 

On the soup wagons of Xerxes I was a cleaner of pans 

On the march of Miltiades' phalanx I had a haft and head, 
I had a bnstling gleaming spear-handle 

Red-headed Cassar picked me for a teamster 
He said, ''Go to work, you Tuscan bastard, 

Rome calls for a man who can drive horses " 



138 


  


The units of conquest led by Charles the Twelfth, 

The whirling whimsical Napoleonic columns 
They saw me one of the horseshoers 

I trimmed the feet of a white horse Bonaparte swept the night stars with 

Lincoln said, “Get into the game, your nation takes you ” 

And I drove a wagon and team and I had my arm shot off 
At Spotsylvania Court House 

I am an ancient reluctant conscript 


HOUSE 

Two Swede families live downstairs and an Irish policeman upstairs, and 
an old soldier. Uncle Joe 

Two Swede boys go upstairs and see Joe His wife is dead, his only son 
IS dead, and his two daughters in Missouri and Texas don’t want him 
around 

The boys and Uncle Joe crack walnuts with a hammer on the bottom of 
a flatiron while the January wind howls and the zero air weaves laces 
on the window glass 

Joe tells the Swede boys all about Chickamauga and Chattanooga, how 
the Union soldiers crept in rain somewhere a dark night and ran for- 
ward and killed many Rebels, took flags, held a hill, and won a victory 
told about in the histones in school 

Joe takes a piece of carpenter’s chalk, draws lines on the floor and piles 
stove wood to show where six regiments were slaughtered dimbing a 
slope 

“Here they went” and “Here they wenh” says Joe, and the January wind 
howls and the zero air weaves laces on the window glass. 

The two Swede boys go downstairs with a big blur of guns, men, and hills 
in their heads They eat hernng and potatoes and tell the family war 
IS a wonder and soldiers are a wonder 

One breaks out with a cry at supper I wish we had a war now and I could 
be a soldier. 



CORNHUSKERS 


^39 


JOHN ERICSSON DAY MEMORIAL, 1918 

Into the gulf and the pit of the dark night, the cold night, there is a man 
goes into the dark and the cold and when he comes back to his people 
he brings fire in his hands and they remember him in the years after- 
ward as the fire brmger— they remember or forget— the man whose 
head kept singing to the want of his home, the want of his people 

For this man there is no name thought of— he has broken from jungles 
and the old oxen and the old wagons— circled the earth with ships— 
belted the earth with steel— swung with wings and a drumming motor 
in the high blue sky— shot his words on a wireless way through shat- 
tering sea storms —out from the night and out from the jungles his 
head keeps singing— there is no road for him but on and on 

Against the sea bastions and the land bastions, against the great air pockets 
of stars and atoms, he points a finger, finds a release clutch, touches a 
button no man knew before 

The soldier with a smoking gun and a gas mask— the workshop man under 
the smokestacks and the blueprints— these two are brothers of the 
handshake never forgotten— for these two we give the salt tears of 
our eyes, the salute of red roses, the flame-won scarlet of poppies 

For the soldier who gives all, for the workshop man who gives all, for 
these the red bar is on the flag— the red bar is the hearf s-blood of the 
mother who gave him, the land that gave him 

The gray foam and the great wheels of war go by and take all— and the 
years give mist and ashes— and our feet stand at these, the memory 
places of the known and the unknown, and our hands give a flame- 
won poppy— our hands touch the red bar of a flag for the sake of those 
who gave— and gave all 




l/fO 


  


REMEMBERED WOMEN 

For a woman’s face remembered as a spot of quick light on the flat land 
of dark night. 

For this memory of one mouth and a forehead they go on in the gray 
ram and the mud, they go on among the boots and guns 
The horizon ahead is a thousand fang flashes, it is a row of teeth that bite 
on the flanks of night, the horizon sings of a new kill and a big kill 
The honzon behind is a wall of dark etched with a memory, fixed with a 
woman’s face— they fight on and on, boots in the mud and heads in 
the gray ram— for the women they hate and the women they love— 
for the women they left behind, they fight on 


OUT OF WHITE LIPS 

Out of white lips a question Shall seven million dead ask for their blood 
a little land for the living wives and children, a little land for the 
living brothers and sisters? 

Out of white lips —Shall they have only air that sweeps round the earth 
for breath of their nostnls and no footing on the dirt of the earth for 
their battle-drabbcd, battle-soaked shoes? 

Out of white lips —Is the red in the flag the blood of a free man on a 
piece of land his own or is it the red of a sheep slit in the throat for 
mutton? 

Out of white lips a white pain murmurs Who shall have land? Him who 
has stood ankle deep in the blood of his comrades, in the red trenches 
dug in the land? 


MEMOIR 

Papa Joffre, the shoulders of him wide as the land of France 
We look on the shoulders filling the stage of the Chicago Auditonum 



CORNHUSKERS 


141 


A fat mayor has spoken much English and the mud of his speech is crossed 
with quicksilver hisses elusive and rapid from floor and gallery 

A neat governor speaks English and the listeners ring chimes to his clear 
thoughts 

Joffre speaks a few words m French, this is a voice of the long firing line 
that runs from the salt sea dunes of Flanders to the white spear crags 
of the Swiss mountains 

This IS the man on whose yes and no has hung the death of battalions and 
brigades, this man speaks of the tricolor of his country now melted in 
a great resolve with the starred bunting of Lincoln and Washington 

This IS the hero of the Marne, massive, irreckonable, he lets tears roll down 
his cheek, they trickle a wet salt off his chin onto the blue coat 

There is a play of American hands and voices equal to sea-breakers and a 
lift of white sun on a stony beach 


A MILLION YOUNG WORKMEN, 1915 

A MILLION young workmen straight and strong lay stiff on the grass and 
roads. 

And the million are now under soil and their rottening flesh will in the 
years feed roots of blood-red roses 

Yes, this million of young workmen slaughtered one another and never 
saw their red hands 

And oh, it would have been a great )ob of killing and a new and beau- 
tiful thing under the sun if the million knew why they hacked and 
tore each other to death. 

The kings are grinning, the kaiser and the czar— they are alive riding in 
leather-seated motor cars, and they have their women and roses for 
ease, and they eat fresh poached eggs for breakfast, new butter on 
toast, sitting in tall water-tight houses reading the news of war 

I dreamed a million ghosts of the young workmen rose m their shirts all 
soaked in crimson and yelled 

God damn the grinning kings, God damn the kaiser and the czar. 

[CHICAGO, 1915] 




142 


COMPLKTE POEMS 


SMOKE 

I SIT in a chair and read the newspapers 

Millions of men go to war, acres of them are buried, guns and ships 
brohen, cities burned, villages sent up in smoke, and children where 
cows are killed off amid hoarse barbecues vanish like finger-rings of 
smoke in a north wind 

I sit m a chair and read the newspapers 


A TALL MAN 

The mouth of this man is a gaunt strong mouth 

The head of this man is a gaunt strong head 

The jaws of this man are bone of the Rocky Mountains, the Appa- 
lachians 

The eyes of this man are chlorine of two sobbing oceans, 

Foam, salt, green, wind, the changing unknown 

The neck of this man is pith of buffalo prairie, old longing and new 
beckoning of corn belt or cotton belt. 

Either a proud Sequoia trunk of the wilderness 

Or huddling lumber of a sawmill waiting to be a roof 

Brother mystery to man and mob mystery. 

Brother cryptic to lifted cryptic hands. 

He IS night and abyss, he is white sky of sun, he is the head of the people. 

The heart of him the red drops of the people. 

The wish of him the steady gray-eagle crag-hunting flights of the people 

Humble dust of a wheel-worn road. 

Slashed sod under the iron-shimng plow. 

These of service in him, these and many cities, many borders, many 
wrangles between Alaska and the Isthmus, between the Isthmus and 
the Horn, and east and west of Omaha, and east and west of Pans, 
Berlin, Petrograd 



CORNHUSKERS 


H3 


The blood in his right wrist and the blood in his left wrist run with the 
right wrist wisdom of the many and the left wrist wisdom of the 
many 

It IS the many he knows, the gaunt strong hunger of the many 


THE FOUR BROTHERS 
Notes for War Songs (November, 1917) 

Make war songs out of these, 

Make chants that repeat and weave 

Make rhythms up to the ragtime chatter of the machine guns, 

Make slow-booming psalms up to the boom of the big guns 
Make a marching song of swinging arms and swinging legs. 

Going along, 

Going along, 

On the roads from San Antonio to Athens, from Seattle to Bagdad — 
The boys and men m winding lines of khaki, the circling squares of 
bayonet points 

Cowpunchers, cornhuskers, shopmen, ready m khaki, 

Ballplayers, lumberjacks, ironworkers, ready m khaki, 

A million, ten million, singing, '1 am ready 
This the sun looks on between two seaboards, 

In the land of Lincoln, m the land of Grant and Lee 

I heard one say, '1 am ready to be killed ” 

I heard another say, ''I am ready to be killed ” 

0 sunburned clear-eyed boys^ 

1 stand on sidewalks and you go by with drums and guns and bugles, 

You—and the flag^ 

And my heart tightens, a fist of something feels my throat 
When you go by. 

You on the kaiser hunt, you and your faces saying, am ready to be 
killed " 

They are hunting death. 

Death for the one-armed mastoid kaiser 

They are after a Hohenzollern head 

There is no man-hunt of men remembered like this. 


144 


  


The four big brothers are out to kill 
France, Russia, Britain, America— 

The four republics are sworn brothers to kill the kaiser 

Yes, this IS the great man-hunt, 

And the sun has never seen till now 

Such a line of toothed and tusked man-killers, 

In the blue of the upper sky. 

In the green of the undersea. 

In the red of winter dawns 
Eating to kill. 

Sleeping to kill. 

Asked by their mothers to kill. 

Wished by four-fifths of the world to kill — 

To cut the kaiser’s throat. 

To hack the kaiser’s head, 

To hang the kaiser on a high-honzon gibbet 

And IS it nothing else than this? 

Three times ten million men thirsting the blood 

Of a half-cracked one-armed child of the German kings? 

'Three times ten million men asking the blood 
Of a child bom with his head wrong-shaped, 

'The blood of rotted kings in his veins? 

If this were all, O God, 

I would go to the far timbers 
And look on the gray wolves 
Teanng the throats of moose 
I would ask a wilder drunk of blood 

Look' It is four brothers in )omed hands together 
'The people of bleeding France, 

The people of bleeding Russia, 

The people of Bntain, the people of Amenca— 

These are the four brothers, these are the four republics 

ft 

At first I said it in anger as one who clenches his fist in wrath to fling 
his knuckles mto the face of some one taunting. 

Now I say it calmly as one who has thought it over and over again at 
night, among the mountains, by the sea-combers in storm 


I say now, by God, only fighters today will save the world, nothing but 
fighters will keep alive the names of those who left red prints of 
bleeding feet at Valley Forge in Christmas snow 
On the cross of Jesus, the sword of Napoleon, the skull of Shakespeare, 
the pen of Tom Jefferson, the ashes of Abraham Lincoln, or any sign 
of the red and running life poured out by the mothers of the world. 
By the God of morning glories climbing blue the doors of quiet homes, 
by the God of tall hollyhocks laughing glad to children in peaceful 
valleys, by the God of new mothers wishing peace to sit at windows 
nursing babies, 

I swear only reckless men, ready to throw away their lives by hunger, 
deprivation, desperate clinging to a single purpose imperturbable and 
undaunted, men with the primitive guts of rebellion. 

Only fighters gaunt with the red brand of labor’s sorrow on their brows 
and labor’s terrible pride in their blood, men with souls asking 
danger— only these will save and keep the four big brothers 

Good-night is the word, good-night to the kings, to the czars, 

Good-night to the kaiser 
The breakdown and the fade-away begins 

The shadow of a great broom, ready to sweep out the trash, is here 

One finger is raised that counts the czar. 

The ghost who beckoned men who come no more — 

The czar gone to the winds on God’s great dustpan, 

The czar a pinch of nothing, 

The last of the gibbering Romanoffs 

Out and good-night— 

The ghosts of the summer palaces 
And the ghosts of the winter palaces^ 

Out and out, good-night to the kings, the czars, the kaisers 

Another finger will speak, 

And the kaiser, the ghost who gestures a hundred million sleeping- 
waking ghosts. 

The kaiser will go onto God’s great dustpan— 

The last of the gibbering Hohenzollems 

Look^ God pities this trash, God waits with a broom and a dustpan, 
God knows a finger will speak and count them out 




146 


  


It IS written m the stars, 

It IS spoken on the walls, 

It clicks in the fire-white zigzag of the Atlantic wireless. 

It mutters in the bastions of thousand-mile continents. 

It sings in a whistle on the midnight winds from Walla Walla to Meso- 
potamia 

Out and good-night 
The millions slow in khaki. 

The millions learning Turkey in the Straw and /ohn Brown’s Body, 

The millions remembenng windrows of dead at Gettysburg, Chicka- 
mauga, and Spotsylvania Court House, 

The millions dreaming of the morning star of Appomattox, 

The millions easy and calm with guns and steel, planes and prows 
There is a hammenng, dmmming hell to come 
The killing gangs are on the way 

God takes one year for a job 

God takes ten years or a million 

God knows when a doom is written 

God knows this job will be done and the words spoken 

Out and good-night 

The red tubes will run. 

And the great price be paid. 

And the homes empty. 

And the wives wishing, 

And the mothers wishing 

There is only one way now, only the way of the red tubes and the great 
pnce 

Well 

Maybe the morning sun is a five-cent yellow balloon. 

And the evening stars the joke of a God gone crazy. 

Maybe the mothers of the world. 

And tire life that pours from their torsal folds— 

Maybe it’s all a he sworn by liars. 

And a God with a cackling laughter says 
“I, the Almighty God, 

I have made all this, 

I have made it for kaisers, czars, and kmgs.” 


CORNHUSKERS 


147 


Three times ten million men say No 
Three times ten million men say 

God IS a God of the People 
And the God who made the world 
And fixed the morning sun. 

And flung the evening stars. 

And shaped the baby hands of life, 

This IS the God of the Four Brothers, 

This IS the God of bleeding France and bleeding Russia, 

This IS the God of the people of Britain and America 

The graves from the Irish Sea to the Caucasus peaks are ten times a 
million 

The stubs and stumps of arms and legs, the eyesockets empty, the crip- 
ples, ten times a million 

The crimson thumb-print of this anathema is on the door panels of a 
hundred million homes 

Cows gone, mothers on sick-beds, children cry a hunger and no milk 
comes in the noon-time or at night 

The death-yells of it all, the torn throats of men m ditches calling for 
water, the shadows and the hacking lungs in dugouts, the steel 
paws that clutch and squeeze a scarlet dram day by day— the storm 
of it IS hell 

But lookJ child* the storm is blowing for a clean air 

Look* the four brothers march 
And hurl their big shoulders 
And swear the ]ob shall be done. 

Out of the wild finger-wnting north and south, east and west, over the 
blood-crossed, blood-dusty ball of earth. 

Out of it all a God who knows is sweeping clean. 

Out of it all a God who sees and pierces through, is breaking and clean- 
ing out an old thousand years, is making ready for a new thousand 
years 

The four brothers shall be five and more 

Under the chimneys of the winter-time the children of the world shall 
sing new songs 

Among the rocking restless cradles the mothers of the world shall sing 
new sleepy-time songs 




SMOKE AND STEEL 



TO 

COL EDWARD J STEICHEN 

paintei of nocturnes and faces, cameia engraver of glints and moments^ listener 
to blue evening winds and new yellow roses, dreamer and finder, 
rider of great mornings in gardens, valleys, battles 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


Smoke of the fields in spring is one, 

Smoke of the leaves in autumn another 
Smoke of a steel-mill roof or a battleship funnel, 

They all go up in a line with a smokestack. 

Or they twist m the slow twist . of the wind. 

If the north wind comes they run to the south 
If the west wind comes they run to the east 
By this sign 
all smokes 
know each other 

Smoke of the fields in spring and leaves m autumn. 
Smoke of the finished steel, chilled and blue. 

By the oath of work they swear 'T know you '' 

Hunted and hissed from the center 

Deep down long ago when God made us over, 

Deep down are the cinders we came from — 

You and I and our heads of smoke 

Some of the smokes God dropped on the job 
Cross on the sky and count our years 
And sing in the secrets of our numbers. 

Sing their dawns and sing their evenings, 

Smg an old log-fire song 

You may put the damper up. 

You may put the damper down, 

The smoke goes up the chimney just the same 

^ 5 ^ 




152 


  


Smoke of a city sunset skyline. 

Smoke of a country dusk horizon— 

They cross on the sky and count our years 

Smoke of a bnck-red dust 
Winds on a spiral 
Out of the stacks 
For a hidden and glimpsing moon 
This, said the bar-iron shed to the blooming mill, 

This IS the slang of coal and steel 
The day-gang hands it to the night-gang. 

The night-gang hands it back 

Stammer at the slang of this — 

Let us understand half of it 

In the rolling mills and sheet mills, 

In the harr and boom of the blast fires. 

The smoke changes its shadow 
And men change their shadow, 

A nigger, a wop, a bohunk changes 

A bar of steel— it is only 

Smoke at the heart of it, smoke and the blood of a man 
A runner of fire ran in it, ran out, ran somewhere else. 

And left— smoke and the blood of a man 

And the finished steel, chilled and blue 

So fire runs in, runs out, runs somewhere else again. 

And the bar of steel is a gun, a wheel, a nail, a shovel, 

A radder under the sea, a steering-gear in the sky. 

And always dark in the heart and through it. 

Smoke and the blood of a man 

Pittsburgh, Youngstown, Gary— they make their steel with men 

In the blood of men and the ink of chimneys 
The smoke nights wnte their oaths 
Smoke into steel and blood into steel. 

Homestead, Braddock, Birmingham, they make their steel with men 
Smoke and blood is the mix of steel 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


^53 


The birdmen drone 
in the blue, it is steel 
a motor sings and zooms 

Steel barbwire around The Works 

Steel guns m the holsters of the guards at the gates of The Works 
Steel ore-boats bring the loads clawed from the earth by steel, lifted and 
lugged by arms of steel, sung on its way by the clanking clam shells 
The runners now, the handlers now, are steel, they dig and clutch and 
haul, they hoist their automatic knuckles from ]ob to job, they are 
steel making steel 

Fire and dust and air fight in the furnaces, the pour is timed, the billets 
wriggle, the clinkers are dumped 

Liners on the sea, skyscrapers on the land, diving steel in the sea, climb- 
ing steel m the sky. 

• • • • 

Finders in the dark, you Steve with a dinner bucket, you Steve clumping 
in the dusk on the sidewalks with an evening paper for the woman 
and kids, you Steve with your head wondering where we all end up— 
Finders in the dark, Steve I hook my arm in cinder sleeves, we go down 
the street together, it is all the same to us, you Steve and the rest 
of us end on the same stars, we all wear a hat in hell together, in 
hell or heaven 

Smoke nights now, Steve 

Smoke, smoke, lost in the sieves of yesterday; 

Dumped again to the scoops and hooks today 
Smoke like the clocks and whistles, always 
Smoke nights now 
Tomorrow something else 

Luck moons come and go 

Five men swim m a pot of red steel 

Their bones are kneaded into the bread of steel 

Their bones are knocked into coils and anvils 

And the sucking plungers of sea-fighting turbines. 

Look for them in the woven frame of a wireless station. 

So ghosts hide m steel like heavy-armed men in mirrors 



154 


  


Peepers, skulkers— they shadow-dance in laughing tombs 
They are always there and they never answer 

One of them said ''I like my job, the company is good to me, America 
IS a wonderful country"' 

One "7^sus, my bones ache, the company is a liar, this is a free country, 
like hell "" 

One '"I got a girl, a peach, we save up and go on a farm and raise pigs 
and be the boss ourselves 

And the others were roughneck singers a long ways from home 
Look for them back of a steel vault door 

They laugh at the cost 

They lift the birdmen into the blue 

It IS steel a motor sings and zooms 

In the subway plugs and drums. 

In the slow hydraulic drills, m gumbo or gravel, 

Under dynamo shafts m the webs of armature spiders 
They shadow-dance and laugh at the cost 

The ovens light a red dome 
Spools of fire wind and wind 
Quadrangles of crimson sputter 
The lashes of dying maroon let down. 

Fire and wind wash out the slag 
Forever the slag gets washed in fire and wind 
The anthem learned by the steel is 
Do this or go hungry 
Look for our rust on a plow 
Listen to us in a threshing-engme razz 
Look at our job in the running wagon wheat 

Fire and wind wash at the slag. 

Box-cars, clocks, steam-shovels, churns, pistons, boilers, scissors— 

Oh, the sleeping slag from the mountains, the slag-heavy pig-iron will go 
down many roads 

Men will stab and shoot with it, and make butter and tunnel rivers, and 
mow hay in swaths, and slit hogs and skin beeves, and steer air- 
planes across North Amenca, Europe, Asia, round the world. 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


^55 


Hacked from a hard rock country, broken and baked in mills and smelters, 
the rusty dust waits 

Till the clean hard weave of its atoms cripples and blunts the drills chew- 
ing a hole in it 

The steel of its plinths and flanges is reckoned, O God, in one-millionth 
of an inch 

Once when I saw the curves of fire, the rough scarf women dancing, 
Dancing out of the flues and smokestacks— flying hair of fire, flying feet 
upside down. 

Buckets and baskets of fire exploding and chortling, fire running wild out 
of the steady and fastened ovens. 

Sparks cracking a harr-harr-huff from a solar-plexus of rock-ribs of the 
earth taking a laugh for themselves, 

Ears and noses of fire, gibbering gorilla arms of fire, gold mud-pies, gold 
bird-wmgs, red jackets riding purple mules, scarlet autocrats tumbling 
from the humps of camels, assassinated czars straddling vermilion 
balloons, 

I saw then the fires flash one by one good-by then smoke, smoke, 
And in the screens the great sisters of night and cool stars, sitting women 
arranging their hair, 

Waiting m the sky, waiting with slow easy eyes, waiting and half- 
murmuring 
'"Since you know all 
and I know nothing, 
tell me what I dreamed last night ” 

Pearl cobwebs in the windy ram, 

m only a flicker of wind, 

are caught and lost and never known again 

A pool of moonshine comes and waits, 
but never waits long the wind picks up 
loose gold like this and is gone 

A bar of steel sleeps and looks slant-eyed 
on the pearl cobwebs, the pools of moonshine, 
sleeps slant-eyed a million years, 
sleeps with a coat of rust, a vest of moths, 
a shirt of gathering sod and loam 




156 


  


The wind never bothers a bar of steel 

The wind picb only pearl cobwebs pools of moonshine 


FIVE TOWNS ON THE B AND O 

By day tireless smokestacks hungry smoky shanties hanging to 
the slopes crooning 
We get by, that’s all 

By night all lit up . fire-gold bars, fire-gold flues and the 
shanties shaking in clumsy shadows almost the hills shaking 
all crooning By God, we’re going to find out or know why 


WORK GANGS 

Box cars run by a mile long 
And I wonder what they say to each other 
When they stop a mile long on a sidetrack 
Maybe their chatter goes 

I came from Fargo with a load of wheat up to the danger line 
I came from Omaha with a load of shorthorns and they splintered my 
boards 

I came from Detroit heavy with a load of flivvers 
I earned apples from the Hood River last year and this year bunches of 
bananas from Florida, they look for me with watermelons from Mis- 
sissippi next year 

Hammers and shovels of work gangs sleep in shop corners 
when the dark stars come on the sky and the night watchmen walk and 
look 

Then the hammer heads talk to the handles, 

then the scoops of the shovels talk, 

how the day’s work nicked and tnmmed them, 

how they swung and lifted all day, 

how the hands of the work gangs smelled of hope 

In the night of the dark stars 

when the curve of the sky is a work gang handle, 

in the night on the mile long sidetracks. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


M7 


in the night where the hammers and shovels sleep in corners, 
the night watchmen stuff their pipes with dreams— 
and sometimes they doze and don't care for nothin', 
and sometimes they search their heads for meanings, stories, stars 
The stuff of it runs like this 

A long way we come, a long way to go, long rests and long deep sniffs for 
our lungs on the way 

Sleep is a belonging of all, even if all songs are old songs and the singing 
heart is snuffed out like a switchman's lantern with the oil gone, 
even if we forget our names and houses in the finish, the secret of 
sleep IS left us, sleep belongs to all, sleep is the first and last and 
best of all 

People singing, people with song mouths connecting with song hearts, 
people who must sing or die, people whose song hearts break if there 
IS no song mouth, these are my people 


PENNSYLVANIA 

I HAVE been in Pennsylvania, 

In the Monongahela and the Hocking Valleys 

In the blue Susquehanna 

On a Saturday morning 

I saw the mounted constabulary go by, 

I saw boys playing marbles 
Spring and the hills laughed 

And m places 

Along the Appalachian chain, 

I saw steel arms handling coal and iron, 

And I saw the white-cauliflower faces 

Of miners' wives waiting for the men to come home from the day's work 

I made color studies in crimson and violet 
Over the dust and domes of culm at sunset 




WHIRLS 


Neither rose leaves gathered in a jar— respectably m Boston — these — nor 
drops of Christ blood for a chalice— decently m Philadelphia or 
Baltimore 

Cinders— these— hissing in a marl and lime of Chicago— also these— the 
howling of northwest winds across North and South Dakota— or the 
spatter of winter spray on sea rocks of Kamchatka 



PEOPLE WHO MUST 

I PAINTED on the roof of a skyscraper 
I painted a long while and called it a day’s work 

The people on a comer swarmed and the traffic cop’s whistle never let 
up all afternoon 

They were the same as bugs, many bugs on their way— 

Those people on the go or at a standstill, 

And the traffic cop a spot of blue, a splinter of brass. 

Where the black tides ran around him 
And he kept the street I painted a long while 
And called it a day's work. 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


^59 


ALLEY RATS 

They were calling certain styles of whiskers by the name of 'lilacs '' 
And another manner of beard assumed m their chatter a verbal guise 
Of "mutton chops/' "galways/' "feather dusters " 

Metaphors such as these sprang from their lips while other street cries 
Sprang from sparrows finding scattered oats among interstices of the curb 
Ah-hah these metaphors~and Ah-hah these boys— among the police they 
were known 

As the Dirty Dozen and their names took the front pages of newspapers 
And two of them croaked on the same day at a "necktie party" . if 
we employ the metaphors of their lips 


ELEVENTH AVENUE RACKET 

There is something terrible 

about a hurdy-gurdy, 

a gypsy man and woman, 

and a monkey in red flannel 

all stopping in front of a big house 

with a sign "For Rent" on the door 

and the blinds hanging loose 

and nobody home 

I never saw this 

I hope to God I never will 

Whoop-de-doodle-de-doo 
Hoodle-de-harr-de-hum 
Nobody home? Everybody home 
Whoop-de-doodle-de-doo 

Mamie Riley married Jimmy Higgins last night Eddie Jones died of 
whooping cough George Hacks got a job on the police force the 
Rosenheims bought a brass bed Lena Hart giggled at a jackie* a 
pushcart man called tomaytoes, tomaytoes 
Whoop-de-doodle-de-doo 
Hoodle-de-harr-de-hum 

Nobody home? Everybody home 


i6o 


  


HOME FIRES 

In a Yiddish eating place on Rivington Street faces coffee 
spots children ticking at the night stars with bare toes from 
bare buttocks 

They know it is September on Rivington when the red tomaytoes cram 
the pushcarts, 

Here the children snozzle at milk bottles, children who have never seen 
a cow 

Here the stranger wonders how so many people remember where they 
keep home fires 


HATS 

Hats, where do you belong? 
what IS under you? 

On the nm of a skyscraper’s forehead 
I looked down and saw hats fifty thousand hats 
Swarming with a noise of bees and sheep, cattle and waterfalls. 
Stopping with a silence of sea grass, a silence of prairie corn 
Hats tell me your high hopes. 


THEY ALL WANT TO PLAY HAMLET 

They all want to play Hamlet 

They have not exactly seen their fathers killed 

Nor their mothers in a frame-up to kill. 

Nor an Ophelia dying with a dust gagging the heart. 

Not exactly the spinning circles of singing golden spiders. 

Not exactly this have they got at nor the meaning of flowers— O flowers, 
flowers slung by a dancing girl— in the saddest play the inkfish, 
Shakespeare, ever wrote. 

Yet they all want to play Hamlet because it is sad like all actors are sad 
and to stand by an open grave with a joker’s skull m the hand and 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


l6l 


then to say over slow and say over slow wise, keen, beautiful words 
masking a heart that's breaking, breaking, 

This IS something that calls and calls to their blood 
They are acting when they talk about it and they know it is acting to be 
particular about it and yet They all want to play Hamlet 


THE MAYOR OF GARY 

I ASKED the Mayor of Gary about the 12-hour day and the 7-day week 
And the Mayor of Gary answered more workmen steal time on the job in 
Gary than any other place in the United States 
''Go into the plants and you will see men sitting around doing nothing- 
machinery does everything,” said the Mayor of Gary when I asked 
him about the 12-hour day and the 7-day week 
And he wore cool cream pants, the Mayor of Gary, and white shoes, and 
a barber had fixed him up with a shampoo and a shave and he was 
easy and imperturbable though the government weather bureau ther- 
mometer said 96 and children were soaking their heads at bubbling 
fountains on the street corners 

And I said good-by to the Mayor of Gary and I went out from the city 
hall and turned the corner into Broadway 
And I saw workmen wearing leather shoes scruffed with fire and cinders, 
and pitted with little holes from running molten steel. 

And some had bunches of specialized muscles around their shoulder blades 
hard as pig iron, muscles of their forearms were sheet steel and the) 
looked to me like men who had been somewhere 

[GARY, INDIANA, I915] 


OMAHA 

Red barns and red heifers spot the green 
grass circles around Omaha— the farmers 
haul tanks of cream and wagon loads of 
cheese 

Shale hogbacks across the nver at Council 
Bluffs— and shanties hang by an eyelash to 
the hill slants back around Omaha 




162 


  


A span of steel ties up the km of Iowa and 
Nebraska across the yellow, big-hoofed Missoun 
River 

Omaha, the roughneck, feeds armies. 

Eats and swears from a dirty face 
Omaha works to get the world a breakfast 


GALOOTS 

Galoots, you hairy, hankering, 

Snousle on the bones you eat, chew at the gnstle and lick the last of it 

Grab off the bones in the paws of other galoots— hook your claws in their 
sleazy mouths— snap and run 

If long-necks sit on their rumps and sing wild cries to the winter moon, 
chasing their tails to the flickers of foolish stars let 'em howl 

Galoots fat with too much, galoots lean with too little, galoot millions and 
millions, snousle and snicker on, plug your exhausts, hunt your snacks 
of fat and lean, grab off yours 


CRABAPPLE BLOSSOMS 

Somebody’s little girl— how easy to make a sob story over who she was once 
and who she is now 

Somebody’s little girl— she played once under a crabapple tree in June and 
the blossoms fell on the dark hair 

It was somewhere on the Ene line and the town was Salamanca or Painted 
Post or Horse’s Head 

And out of her hair she shook the blossoms and went into the house and 
her mother washed her face and her mother had an ache m her heart 
at a rebel voice, “I don’t want to ” 

Somebody’s little girl— forty little girls of somebodies splashed in red tights 
forming horseshoes, arches, pyramids— forty little show girls, ponies, 
squabs 

How easy a sob story over who she once was and who she is now — and 
how the crabapple blossoms fell on her dark hair in June 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


163 


Let the lights of Broadway spangle and splatter—and the taxis hustle the 
crowds away when the show is over and the street goes dark 
Let the girls wash off the paint and go for their midnight sandwiches— 
let 'em dream in the morning sun, late in the morning, long after the 
morning papers and the milk wagons— 

Let 'em dream long as they want to of June somewhere on the Erie 
line and crabapple blossoms 


REAL ESTATE NEWS 

Armour Avenue was the name of this street and door signs on empty 
houses read “The Silver Dollar," “Swede Annie" and the Christian 
names of madams such as “Myrtle" and “Jenny " 

Scrap iron, rags and bottles fill the front rooms hither and yon and signs 
in Yiddish say Abe Kaplan & Co are running junk shops m whore 
houses of former times 

The segregated district, the Tenderloin, is here no more, the red-lights are 
gone, the ring of shovels handling scrap iron replaces the banging of 
pianos and the bawling songs of pimps. 

[CHICAGO, 1915] 


MANUAL SYSTEM 

Mary has a thmgamajig clamped on her ears 

And sits all day taking plugs out and sticking plugs in 

Flashes and flashes— voices and voices 

calling for ears to pour words in 
Faces at the ends of wires asking for other faces 
at the ends of other wires 
All day taking plugs out and sticking plugs m, 

Mary has a thmgamajig clamped on her ears. 


STRIPES 

Policeman in front of a bank 3AM lonely 
Policeman State and Madison high noon 
parcels lonely. 


mobs . 


cars 


164 


  


Woman m suburbs keeping night watch on a sleeping typhoid pa- 
tient only a clock to talk to lonesome 
Woman selling gloves bargain day department store funous 
crazy-work of many hands slipping m and out of gloves lone- 
some 


HONKY TONK IN CLEVELAND, OHIO 

It’s a jazz affair, drum crashes and cornet razzes 
The trombone pony neighs and the tuba jackass snorts 
The banjo tickles and titters too awful 
The chippies talk about the funnies in the papers 
The cartoonists weep in their beer 
Ship riveters talk with their feet 
To the feet of floozies under the tables 
A quartet of white hopes mourn with interspersed snickers 
“I got the blues 
I got the blues. 

I got the blues ” 

And as we said earlier 

The cartoonists weep in their beer 


CRAPSHOOTERS 

Somebody loses whenever somebody wins 
This was known to the Chaldeans long ago 
And more somebody wins whenever somebody loses 
This too was in the savvy of the Chaldeans 

They take it heaven’s hereafter is an eternity of crap games where they 
try their wrists years and years and no police come with a wagon, the 
game goes on forever 

The spots on the dice are the music signs of the songs of heaven here 
God IS Luck Luck is God we are all bones the High Thrower rolled 
some are two spots, some double sixes 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


165 


The myths are Phoebe, Little Joe, Big Dick 
Hope runs high with a Huh, seven—huh, come seven 
This too was in the savvy of the Chaldeans 


SOUP 

I SAW a famous man eating soup 

I say he was lifting a fat broth 

Into his mouth with a spoon 

His name was in the newspapers that day 

Spelled out in tall black headlines 

And thousands of people were talking about him 

When I saw him. 

He sat bending his head over a plate 
Putting soup m his mouth with a spoon 


CLINTON SOUTH OF POLK 

I WANDER down on Clinton street south of Polk 
And listen to the voices of Italian children quarreling 
It IS a cataract of coloratura 

And I could sleep to their musical threats and accusations 


BLUE ISLAND INTERSECTION 

Six street ends come together here 
They feed people and wagons into the center 
In and out all day horses with thoughts of nose-bags, 
Men with shovels, women with baskets and baby buggies 
Six ends of streets and no sleep for them all day 
The people and wagons come and go, out and in. 
Triangles of banks and drug stores watch 
The policemen whistle, the trolley cars bump 
Wheels, wheels, feet, feet, all day 


i66 


  


In the false dawn when the chickens blink 
And the east shakes a lazy baby toe at tomorrow. 
And the east fixes a pink half-eye this way. 

In the time when only one milk wagon crosses 
These three streets, these six street ends. 

It IS the sleep time and they rest. 

The triangle banks and drug stores rest 
The policeman is gone, his star and gun sleep 
The owl car blutters along in a sleep-walk 


RED-HEADED RESTAURANT CASHIER 
Shake back your hair, O red-headed girl 

Let go your laughter and keep your two proud freckles on your chin 
Somewhere is a man looking for a red-headed giil and some day maybe 
he will look into your eyes for a restaurant cashier and find a lover, 
maybe 

Around and around go ten thousand men hunting a red-headed girl with 
two freckles on her chin 
I have seen them hunting, hunting 

Shake back your hair, let go your laughter. 


BOY AND FATHER 

The boy Alexander understands his father to be a famous lawyer 
The leather law books of Alexander’s father fill a room like hay in a bam 
Alexander has asked his father to let him build a house like bricklayers 
build, a house with walls and roofs made of big leather law books 

The ram beats on the windows 
And the raindrops run down the window glass 
And the raindrops slide off the green blinds down the siding 
The boy Alexander dreams of Napoleon in John C Abbott’s history, 
Napoleon the grand and lonely naan wronged, Napoleon in his life 
wronged and in his memory wronged 
The boy Alexander dreams of the cat Alice saw, the cat fading off into 
Ihe dark and leaving the teeth of its Cheshire smile lighting the 
gloom. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


167 


Buffaloes, blizzards, way down in Texas, in the panhandle of Texas snug- 
gling close to New Mexico, 

These creep into Alexander's dreaming by the window when his father 
talks with strange men about land down in Deaf Smith County 
Alexander's father tells the strange men Five years ago we ran a Ford out 
on the prairie and chased antelopes 

Only once or twice in a long while has Alexander heard his father say 
'"my first wife" so-and-so and such-and-such 
A few times softly the father has told Alexander, 'Tour mother . . . was 
a beautiful woman . but we won't talk about her " 

Always Alexander listens with a keen listen when he hears his father men- 
tion "my first wife" or "Alexander's mother " 

Alexander's father smokes a cigar and the Episcopal rector smokes a cigar 
and the words come often mystery of life, mystery of life 
These two come into Alexander's head blurry and gray while the ram 
beats on the windows and the raindrops run down the window glass 
and the raindrops slide off the green blinds and down the siding 
These and There is a God, there must be a God, how can there be rain 
or sun unless there is a God? 

So from the wrongs of Napoleon and the Cheshire cat smile on to the 
buffaloes and blizzards of Texas and on to his mother and to God, so 
the blurry gray ram dreams of Alexander have gone on five minutes, 
maybe ten, keeping slow easy time to the raindrops on the window 
glass and the raindrops sliding off the green blinds and down the 
siding 


CLEAN CURTAINS 

New neighbors came to the corner house at Congress and Green streets 

The look of their clean white curtains was the same as the nm o£ a nun's 
bonnet. 

One way was an oyster pail factory, one way they made candy, one way 
paper boxes, strawboard cartons 


i68 


  


The warehouse trucks shook the dust of the ways loose and the wheels 
whirled dust— there was dust of hoof and wagon wheel and rubber 
tire— dust of police and fire wagons— dust of the winds that circled 
at midnights and noon listening to no prayers 

“O mother, I know the heart of you,” I sang passing the nm of a nun’s 
bonnet— O white curtains— and people clean as the prayers of Jesus 
here in the faded ramshackle at Congress and Green 

Dust and the thundenng trucks won— the barrages of the street wheels 
and the lawless wind took their way— was it five weeks or six the little 
mother, the new neighbors, battled and then took away the white 
prayers in the windows? 


CRIMSON CHANGES PEOPLE 

Dm I see a crucifix in your eyes 
and nails and Roman soldiers 
and a dusk Golgotha? 

Did I see Mary, the changed woman, 
washing the feet of all men, 
clean as new grass 
when the old grass bums? 

Did I see moths in your eyes, lost moths, 
with a flutter of wings that meant 
we can never come again 

Did I see No Man’s Land in your eyes 
and men with lost faces, lost loves, 
and you among the stubs crying? 

Did I see you m the red death ]azz of war 
losing moths among lost faces, 
speaking to the stubs who asked you 
to speak of songs and God and dancing, 
of bananas, northern lights or Jesus, 
any hummingbird of thought whatever 
flying away from the red death jazz of war? 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


169 


Did I see your hand make a useless gesture 
trying to say with a code of five fingers 
something the tongue only stutters^ 
did I see a dusk Golgotha? 


NEIGHBORS 

On Forty-first Street 
near Eighth Avenue 
a frame house wobbles 

If houses went on crutches 
this house would be 
one of the cripples 

A sign on the house 

Church of the Living God 

And Rescue Home for Orphan Children 

From a Greek coffee house 
Across the street 
A cabalistic jargon 
Jabbers back 

And men at tables 

Spill Peloponnesian syllables 

And speak of shovels for street work 

And the new embankments of the Erie Railroad 

At Painted Post, Horse’s Head, Salamanca 


CAHOOTS 

Play it across the table 
What if we steal this city blind? 

If they want any thing let ’em nail it down 

Harness bulls, dicks, front office men, 

And the high goats up on the bench, 

Ain’t they all in cahoots? 




  


170 


Ain’t it fifty-fifty all down the line, 

Petemen, dips, boosters, stick-ups and guns— 
what’s to hinder? 

Go fifty-fifty 

If they nail you call in a mouthpiece 
Fix it, you gazump, you slant-head, fix it 
Feed ’em 

Nothin’ ever sticks to my fingers, nah, nah, 
nothin’ like that. 

But there ain’t no law we got to wear mittens— 
huh— is there? 

Mittens, that’s a good one— mittens’ 

There oughta be a law everybody wear mittens 


BLUE MAROONS 

“You slut,” he flung at her 
It was more than a hundred times 
He had thrown it into her face 
And by this time it meant nothing to her. 
She said to herself upstairs sweeping, 
“Clocks are to tell time with, pitchers 
Hold milk, spoons dip out gravy, and a 
Coffee pot keeps the respect of those 
Who drink coffee— I am a woman whose 
Husband gives her a kiss once for ten 
Times he ihrows it in my face, Tou slut ’ 
If I go to a small town and him along 
Or if I go to a big city and him along, 
WTiat of it? Am I better off?” She swept 
The upstairs and came downstairs to Bx 
Dinner for the family 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


171 


THE HANGMAN AT HOME 

What does the hangman think about 
When he goes home at night from work^ 
When he sits down with his wife and 
Children for a cup of coffee and a 
Plate of ham and eggs, do they ask 
Him if it was a good day's work 
And everything went well or do they 
Stay off some topics and talk about 
The weather, baseball, politics 
And the comic strips m the papers 
And the movies^ Do they look at his 
Hands when he reaches for the coffee 
Or the ham and eggs? If the little 
Ones say, Daddy, play horse, here's 
A rope— does he answer like a joke 
I seen enough rope for today? 

Or does his face light up like a 
Bonfire of joy and does he say 
It's a good and dandy world we live 
In And if a white face moon looks 
In through a window where a baby girl 
Sleeps and the moon-gleams mix with 
Baby ears and baby hair— the hangman— 
How does he act then? It must be easy 
For him Anything is easy for a hangman, 
I guess 


MAN, THE MAN-HUNTER 

I SAW Man, the man-hunter. 
Hunting with a torch in one hand 
And a kerosene can in the other. 
Hunting with guns, ropes, shackles 




  


172 

I listened 

And the high cry rang. 

The high cry of Man, the man-hunter 
We'll get you yet, you sbxyzch* 

I listened later. 

The high cry rang* 

Kill him* kill him* the sbxyzch* 

In the morning the sun saw 

Two butts of something, a smoking rump. 

And a warning in charred wood 

Well, we got him, 
the sbxyzch 


THE SINS OF KALAMAZOO 

The sms of Kalamazoo are neither scarlet nor crimson 
The sins of Kalamazoo are a convict gray, a dishwater drab 
And the people who sin the sms of Kalamazoo are neither scarlet nor 
crimson 

They run to drabs and grays— and some of them sing they shall be washed 
whiter than snow— and some We should worry 

Yes, Kalamazoo is a spot on the map 

And the passenger trams stop there 

And the factory smokestacks smoke 

And the grocery stores are open Saturday nights 

And the streets are free for citizens who vote 

And inhabitants counted m the census 

Saturday night is the big night 

Listen with your ears on a Saturday night m Kalamazoo 
And say to yourself I hear America, I hear, what do I hear? 

Mam street there runs through the middle of the town 
And there is a dirty post office 
And a dirty city hall 
And a dirty railroad stabon 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


m 


And the United States flag cries, cries the Stars and Stripes to the four 
winds on Lincoln's birthday and the Fourth of July 

Kalamazoo kisses a hand to something far off 

Kalamazoo calls to a long horizon, to a shivering silver angel, to a creeping 
mystic what-is-it 

'‘We're here because we're here," is the song of Kalamazoo 
"We don't know where we're going but we're on our way," are the words 
There are hound dogs of bronze on the public square, hound dogs looking 
far beyond the public square 

Sweethearts there m Kalamazoo 

Go to the general delivery window of the post office 

And speak their names and ask for letters 

And ask again, "Are you sure there is nothing for me^ 

I wish you'd look agam—there must be a letter for me." 

And sweethearts go to the city hall 

And tell their names and say, "We want a license " 

And they go to an installment house and buy a bed on time and a clock 
And the children grow up asking each other, "What can we do to kill 
time^" 

They grow up and go to the railroad station and buy tickets for Texas, 
Pennsylvania, Alaska 

"Kalamazoo is all right," they say "But I want to see the world " 

And when they have looked the world over they come back saying it is all 
like Kalamazoo 

The trams come m from the east and hoot for the crossings. 

And buzz away to the peach country and Chicago to the west 
Or they come from the west and shoot on to the Battle Creek breakfast 
bazaars 

And the speedbug heavens of Detroit 

"I hear America, I hear, what do I hear?" 

Said a loafer lagging along on the sidewalks of Kalamazoo, 

Lagging along and asking questions, reading signs 

Oh yes, there is a town named Kalamazoo, 

A spot on the map where the trains hesitate 


174 


  


I saw the sign of a five and ten cent store there 

And the Standard Oil Company and the International Harvester 

And a graveyard and a ball grounds 

And a short order counter where a man can get a stack of wheats 
And a pool hall where a rounder leered confidential like and said 
“Lookin’ for a quiet game?” 

The loafer lagged along and asked, 

“Do you make guitars here? 

Do you make boxes the singing wood winds ask to sleep in? 

Do you rig up strings the singing wood winds sift over and sing low?” 
The answer “We manufacture musical instruments here ” 

Here I saw churches with steeples like hatpins. 

Undertaking rooms with sample coffins m the show window 
And signs everywhere satisfaction is guaranteed. 

Shooting galleries where men kill imitation pigeons, 

And there were doctors for the sick. 

And lawyers for people waiting in jail. 

And a dog catcher and a superintendent of streets. 

And telephones, water-works, trolley cars, 

And newspapers with a splatter of telegrams from sister cities of Kala- 
mazoo the round world over 

And the loafer lagging along said 
Kalamazoo, you ain’t m a class by yourself, 

I seen you before in a lot of places 
If you are nuts America is nuts 

And lagging along he said bitterly 
Before I came to Kalamazoo I was silent 
Now I am gabby, God help me, I am gabby. 

Kalamazoo, both of us will do a fadeaway 
I will be earned out feet first 
And time and the ram will chew you to dust 
And the winds blow you away 

And an old, old mother will lay a green moss cover on my bones 
And a green moss cover on the stones of your post office and city hall 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


^75 


Best of all 

I have loved your kiddies playing run-sheep-run 

And cutting their initials on the ball ground fence 

They knew every time I fooled them who was fooled and how 

Best of all 

I have loved the red gold smoke of your sunsets, 

I have loved a moon with a ring around it 
Floating over your public square, 

I have loved the white dawn frost of early winter silver 
And purple over your railroad tracks and lumber yards 

The wishing heart of you I loved, Kalamazoo 
I sang bye-lo, bye-lo to your dreams 
I sang bye-lo to your hopes and songs 

I wished to God there were hound dogs of bronze on your public square. 
Hound dogs with bronze paws looking to a long horizon with a shivering 
silver angel, 

a creeping mystic what-is-it. 


BroteiOL-'Face Gargoyles 


BROKEN-FACE GARGOYLES 

All I can give you is broken-face gargoyles 
It is too early to sing and dance at funerals. 

Though I can whisper to you I am looking for an undertaker humming 
a lullaby and throwing his feet in a swift and mystic buck-and-wmg, 
now you see it and now you don't 




  


176 


Fish to swim a pool m your garden flashing a speckled silver, 

A basket of wine-saps filling your room with flame-dark for your eyes and 
the tang of valley orchards for your nose, 

Such a beautiful pail of fish, such a beautiful peck of apples, I cannot 
bring you now 

It IS too early and I am not footloose yet 

I shall come m the night when I come with a hammer and saw 

I shall come near your window, where you look out when your eyes open 
in the morning, 

And there I shall slam together bird-houses and bird-baths for wmg-loose 
wrens and hummers to live in, birds with yellow wing tips to blur 
and buzz soft all summer, 

So I shall make little fool homes with doors, always open doors for all 
and each to run away when they want to 

I shall come ]ust like that even though now it is early and I am not yet 
footloose. 

Even though I am still looking for an undertaker with a raw, wind-bitten 
face and a dance in his feet 

I make a date with you (put it down) for six o'clock m the evening a 
thousand years from now 

All I can give you now is broken-face gargoyles 

All I can give you now is a double gorilla head with two fish mouths and 
four eagle eyes hooked on a street wall, spouting water and looking 
two ways to the ends of the street for the new people, the young 
strangers, coming, coming, always coming 

It is early 

I shall yet be footloose 


APRONS OF SILENCE 

Many things I might have said today 
And I kept my mouth shut 
So many times I was asked 
To come and say the same things 
Everybody was saying, no end 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


177 


To the yes-yes, yes-yes, 
me-too, me-too 

The aprons of silence covered me 
A wire and hatch held my tongue. 

I spit nails into an abyss and listened 
I shut off the gabble of Jones, Johnson, Smith, 

All whose names take pages in the city directory 

I fixed up a padded cell and lugged it around 
I locked myself in and nobody knew it 
Only the keeper and the kept in the hoosegow 
Knew it—on the streets, in the post office, 

On the cars, into the railroad station 
Where the caller was calling, '"All a-board. 

All a-board for Blaa-blaa Blaa-blaa, 

Blaa-blaa and all points northwest all a-board 
Here I took along my own hoosegow 
And did business with my own thoughts 
Do you see? It must be the aprons of silence. 


DEATH SNIPS PROUD MEN 

Death is stronger than all the governments because the governments are 
men and men die and then death laughs Now you see 'em, now you 
don't 

Death is stronger than all proud men and so death snips proud men on 
the nose, throws a pair of dice and says Read 'em and weep 

Death sends a radiogram every day When I want you I'll drop in— and 
then one day he comes with a master-key and lets himself in and says 
We'll go now 

Death is a nurse mother with big arms 'Twon't hurt you at all, it's your 
time now, you just need a long sleep, child, what have you had any- 
how better than sleep? 



  


178 


GOOD NIGHT 

Many ways to spell good night 

Fireworks at a pier on the Fourth of July 

spell it with red wheels and yellow spokes 

They fizz in the air, touch the water and quit 

Rockets make a trajectory of gold-and-blue 
and then go out 

Railroad trains at night spell with a smokestack mushrooming a white 
pillar 

Steamboats turn a curve in the Mississippi crying in a baritone that crosses 
lowland cottonfields to a razorback hill 

It IS easy to spell good night 

Many ways to spell good night 


SHIRT 

My shirt is a token and symbol, 
more than a cover for sun and ram, 
my shirt is a signal, 
and a teller of souls 

I can take off my shirt and tear it, 
and so make a npping razzly noise, 
and the people will say, 

“Look at him tear his shirt ” 

I can keep my shirt on 
I can stick around and sing like a little bird 
and look ’em all in the eye and never be fazed 
I can keep my shut on. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


179 


JAZZ FANTASIA 

Drum on your drums, batter on your banjoes, 
sob on the long cool winding saxophones 
Go to it, O jazzmen 

Sling your knuckles on the bottoms of the happy 
tin pans, let your trombones ooze, and go husha- 
husha-hush with the slippery sand-paper 

Moan like an autumn wind high in the lonesome treetops, moan soft like 
you wanted somebody terrible, cry like a racing car slipping away from a 
motorcycle cop, bang-bangf you jazzmen, bang altogether drums, traps, 
banjoes, horns, tin cans— make two people fight on the top of a stairway 
and scratch each other's eyes m a clinch tumbling down the stairs. 

Can the rough stuff now a Mississippi steamboat pushes up the night 
river with a hoo-hoo-hoo-00 and the green lanterns calling to the high 
soft stars a red moon rides on the humps of the low river hills . . 
go to it, O jazzmen 


DO YOU WANT AFFIDAVITS^ 

There's a hole in the bottom of the sea 
Do you want affidavits^ 

There's a man in the moon with money for you 
Do you want affidavits^ 

There are ten dancing girls in a sea-chamber off Nantucket waiting for you 
There are tall candles in Timbuctoo burning penance for you 
There are— anything else? 

Speak now— for now we stand amid the great wishing windows— and the 
law says we are free to be wishing all this week at the windows 
Shall I raise my right hand and swear to you in the monotone of a notary 
public? this is ''the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth " 


i8o 


  


^^OLD-FASHIONED REQUITED LOVE" 

I HAVE ransacked the encyclopedias 
And slid my fingers among topics and titles 
Looking for you 

And the answer comes slow 
There seems to be no answer 

I shall ask the next banana peddler the who and the why of it 

Or— the iceman with his iron tongs gripping a clear cube in summer sun- 
light— maybe he will know 


PURPLE MARTINS 

If we were such and so, the same as these, 
maybe we too would be shngers and sliders, 
tumbling half over in the water mirrors, 
tumbling half over at the horse heads of the sun, 
tumbling our purple numbers 

Twirl on, you and your satin blue 
Be water birds, be air birds 
Be these purple tumblers you are 

Dip and get away 
From loops into slip-knots. 

Write your own ciphers and figure eights 
It is your wooded island here in Lincoln park 
Everybody knows this belongs to you 

Five fat geese 
Eat grass on a sod bank 
And never count your slinging ciphers, 

your sliding figure eights. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


l8l 


A man on a green paint iron bench, 

Slouches his feet and sniffs in a book, 

And looks at you and your loops and slip-knots, 

And looks at you and your sheaths of satin blue, 

And slouches again and sniffs in the book. 

And mumbles It is an idle and a doctrinaire exploit 
Go on tumbling half over in the water mirrors 
Go on tumbling half over at the horse heads of the sun 
Be water birds, be air birds 
Be these purple tumblers you are 


BRASS KEYS 

Joy weaving two violet petals for a coat lapel 
painting on a slab of night sky a Christ face 
slipping new brass keys into rusty iron locks and 
shouldering till at last the door gives and we are in 
a new room forever and ever violet petals, slabs, 
the Christ face, brass keys and new rooms 

are we near or far? . is there anything else? who comes back? 

and why does love ask nothing and give all? and why is love rare as 
a tailed comet shaking guesses out of men at telescopes ten feet long? why 
does the mystery sit with its chin on the lean forearm of women m gray 
eyes and women in hazel eyes? 

are any of these less proud, less important, than a cross-examining lawyer? 
are any of these less perfect than the front page of a morning newspaper? 

the answers are not computed and attested in the back of an arithmetic 
for the verifications of the lazy 

there is no authority in the phone book for us to call 
and ask the why, the wherefore, and the howbeit 
if s . a riddle . by God 



282 


  


PICK-OFFS 

The telescope picks off star dust 
on the clean steel sky and sends it to me 

The telephone picks oflE my voice and 
sends it cross country a thousand miles 

The eyes in my head pick off pages of 
Napoleon memoirs a rag handler, 
a head of dreams walks in a sheet of 
mist the palace panels shut in no- 
bodies drinking nothings out of silver 
helmets in the end we all come to a 
rock island and the hold of the sea-walls 


MANUFACTURED GODS 

They put up big wooden gods 

Then they burned the big wooden gods 

And put up brass gods and 

Changing their minds suddenly 

Knocked down the brass gods and put up 

A doughface god with gold eamngs 

The poor mutts, the pathetic slant heads. 

They didn’t know a little bn god 

Is as good as anything in the line of gods 

Nor how a little tin god answers prayer 

And makes ram and brings luck 

The same as a big wooden god or a brass 

God or a doughface god with golden 

Earrings 


MASK 

To have your face left overnight 
Flung on a board by a crazy sculptor. 
To have your face drop oflE a board 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


183 


And fall to pieces on a floor 
Lost among lumps all finger-marked 
—•How now^ 

To be calm and level, placed high, 
Looking among perfect women bathing 
And among bareheaded long-armed men. 
Corner dreams of a cra2y sculptor. 

And then to fall, drop clean off the board. 
Four o'clock in the morning and not a dog 
Nor a policeman anywhere— 

Hoo hoo^ 

had it been my laughing face 
maybe I would laugh with you, 
but my lover's face, the face I give 
women and the moon and the sea! 



Jigs o: 


£ Ae Winl 


FOUR PRELUDES ON PLAYTHINGS OF THE WIND 
“The past is a bucket of ashes ” 

1 

The woman named Tomorrow 
sits with a hairpin m her teeth 
and takes her time 

and does her hair the way she wants it 
and fastens at last the last braid and coil 
and puts the hairpin where it belongs 



184 


  


and turns and drawls Well, what of iP 
My grandmother, Yesterday, is gone 
What of iP Let the dead be dead 

2 

The doors were cedar 
and the panels stnps of gold 
and the girls were golden girls 
and the panels read and the girls chanted 
We are the greatest city, 
the greatest nation 
nothing like us ever was 
The doors are twisted on broken hinges 
Sheets of ram swish through on the wind 

where the golden girls ran and the panels read 
We are the greatest city, 
the greatest nation, 
nothing like us ever was 

3 

It has happened before 
Strong men put up a city and got 
a nation together. 

And paid singers to sing and women 

to warble We are the greatest city, 
the greatest nation, 
nothing like us ever was. 

And while the singers sang 
and die strong men listened 
and paid the singers well 
and felt good about it all, 
there were rats and lizards who listened 
. . and the only listeners left now 

. . are . the rats . and the lizards. 

And there are black crows 
crying, “Caw, caw,” 
bnnging mud and sticks 
building a nest 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


185 


over the words carved 
on the doors where the panels were cedar 
and the strips on the panels were gold 
and the golden girls came singing 
We are the greatest city, 
the greatest nation 
nothing like us ever was 

The only singers now are crows crying, ''Caw, caw,"' 

And the sheets of ram whine in the wind and doorways 
And the only listeners now are . the rats and the lizards 

4 

The feet of the rats 

scnbble on the doorsills, 

the hieroglyphs of the rat footprints 

chatter the pedigrees of the rats 

and babble of the blood 

and gabble of the breed 

of the grandfathers and the great-grandfathers 

of the rats 

And the wind shifts 

and the dust on a doorsill shifts 

and even the writing of the rat footprints 

tells us nothing, nothing at all 

about the greatest city, the greatest nation 

where the strong men listened 

and the women warbled Nothing like us ever was. 


BROKEN TABERNACLES 

Have I broken the smaller tabernacles, O Lord^ 

And in the destruction of these set up the greater and massive, the ever- 
lasting tabernacles? 

I know nothing today, what I have done and why, O Lord, only I have 
broken and broken tabernacles 

They were beautiful in a way, these tabernacles tom down by strong 
hands swearing— 


  


1 86 


They were beautiful— why did the hypocrites carve their own names on 
the comer-stones? why did the h^pocrltes keep on singing their own 
names in their long noses every Sunday in these tabernacles? 

Who lays any blame here among the split comer-stones? 


OSAWATOMIE 


I don’t know how he came, 
shambling, dark, and strong 

He stood in the city and told men 

My people are fools, my people are young and strong, my people must 
learn, my people are terrible workers and fighters 
Always he kept on asking Where did that blood come from? 

They said You for the fool killer, 
you for the booby hatch 
and a necktie party 

They hauled him into ]ail 

They sneered at him and spit on him. 

And he wrecked their jails. 

Singing, “God damn your jails,” 

And when he was most in jail 
Grammy among the crazy m the dark 
Then he was most of all out of jail 
Shambling, dark, and strong. 

Always asking Where did that blood come from? 

They laid hands on him 
And the fool killers had a laugh 
And the necktie party was a go, by God 
They laid hands on him and he was a goner 
They hammered him to pieces and he stood up 
They buned him and he walked out of the grave, by God, 

Asbng again. Where did that blood come from? 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


187 


LONG GUNS 

Then came, Oscar, the time of the guns 
And there was no land for a man, no land for a country. 
Unless guns sprang up 
And spoke their language 
The how of running the world was all m guns 

The law of a God keeping sea and land apart. 

The law of a child sucking milk, 

The law of stars held together, 

They slept and worked in the heads of men 
Making twenty mile guns, sixty mile guns. 

Speaking their language 
Of no land for a man, no land for a country 
Unless guns unless guns 

There was a child wanted the moon shot off the sky, 
asking a long gun to get the moon, 
to conquer the insults of the moon, 
to conquer something, anything, 
to put it over and win the day. 

To show them the running of the world was all in guns 
There was a child wanted the moon shot off the sky. 

They dreamed in the time of the guns . of guns 


DUSTY DOORS 

Child of the Aztec gods, 
how long must we listen here, 
how long before we go? 

The dust is deep on the lintels 
The dust is dark on the doors 
If the dreams shake our bones, 
what can we say or do? 


i88 


  


Since early morning we waited 
Since early, early morning, child 
There must be dieams on the way now 
There must be a song for our bones 

The dust gets deeper and darker 
Do the doors and lintels shudder^ 

How long must we listen here^ 

How long before we go^ 


FLASH CRIMSON 

I SHALL cry God to give me a broken foot 

I shall ask for a scar and a slashed nose 

I shall take the last and the worst 

I shall be eaten by gray creepers in a bunkhouse where no runners of the 
sun come and no dogs live 

And yet— of all ''and yets'’ this is the bronze strongest— 

I shall keep one thing better than all else, there is the blue steel of a great 
star of early evening in it, it lives longer than a broken foot or any 
scar 

The broken foot goes to a hole dug with a shovel or the bone of a nose 
may whiten on a hilltop— and yet— "and yet"— 

There is one crimson pinch of ashes left after all, and none of the shifting 
winds that whip the grass and none of the pounding rains that beat 
the dust, know how to touch or find the flash of this crimson 

I cry God to give me a broken foot, a scar, or a lousy death 

I who have seen the flash of this crimson, I ask God for the last and worst 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


189 


THE LAWYERS KNOW TOO MUCH 

The lawyers, Bob, know too much 

They are chums of the books of old John Marshall 

They know it all, what a dead hand wrote, 

A stiff dead hand and its knuckles crumbling. 

The bones of the fingers a thin white ash 
The lawyers know 
a dead man's thoughts too well 

In the heels of the higgling lawyers. Bob, 

Too many slippery ifs and buts and howevers. 

Too much hereinbefore provided whereas, 

Too many doors to go m and out of 

When the lawyers are through 
What IS there left. Bob? 

Can a mouse nibble at it 

And find enough to fasten a tooth in? 

Why is there always a secret singing 
When a lawyer cashes in? 

Why does a hearse horse snicker 
Hauling a lawyer away? 

The work of a bricklayer goes to the blue 
The knack of a mason outlasts a moon 
The hands of a plasterer hold a room together 
The land of a farmer wishes him back again 
Singers of songs and dreamers of plays 
Build a house no wind blows over 

The lawyers—tell me why a hearse horse snickers hauling a lawyer's bones 


LOSERS 

If I should pass the tomb of Jonah 
I would stop there and sit for a while. 

Because I was swallowed one time deep in the dark 
And came out alive after all 


Ipo 


  


If I pass the burial spot of Nero 
I shall say to the wind, 'Well, well*'' — 

I who have fiddled in a world on fire, 

I who have done so many stunts not worth doing 

I am looking for the grave of Smbad too 
I want to shake his ghost-hand and say, 

"Neither of us died very early, did we?'' 

And the last sleeping-place of Nebuchadnezzar— 
When I arrive there I shall tell the wind 
"You ate grass, I have eaten crow— 

Who is better off now or next year?" 

Jack Cade, John Brown, Jesse James, 

There too I could sit down and stop for a while 
I think I could tell their headstones 
"God, let me remember all good losers " 

I could ask people to throw ashes on their heads 
In the name of that sergeant at Belleau Woods, 
Walking into the drumfires, calling his men, 

"Come on, you Do you want to live forever?" 


PLACES 

Roses and gold 
For you today. 

And the flash of flying flags 

I will have 
Ashes, 

Dust in my hair, 
Cmshes of hoofs 


Your name 
Fills the mouth 
Of nch man and poor 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


191 


Women bring 
Armfuls of flowers 
And throw on you 

I go hungry 
Down m dreams 
And loneliness. 

Across the ram 
To slashed hills 

Where men wait and hope for me 


THREES 

I WAS a boy when I heard three red words 
a thousand Frenchmen died m the streets 
for Liberty, Equality, Fraternity— I asked 
why men die for words 

I was older, men with mustaches, sideburns, 
lilacs, told me the high golden words are 
Mother, Home, and Heaven— other older men with 
face decorations said God, Duty, Immortality 
—they sang these threes slow from deep lungs 

Years ticked off their say-so on the great clocks 
of doom and damnation, soup and nuts meteors flashed 
their say-so and out of great Russia came three 
dusky syllables workmen took guns and went out to die 
for Bread, Peace, Land 

And I met a marine of the U S A , a leatherneck with a girl on his knee 
for a memory m ports circling the earth and he said Tell me how to say 
three things and I always get by— gimme a plate of ham and eggs— how 
much?— and— do you love me, kid? 


THE LIARS 
{March, 1919) 


A LIAR goes in fine clothes 
A liar goes in rags 

A liar IS a liar, clothes or no clothes 
A liar IS a liar and lives on the lies he tells 
and dies in a life of lies 
And the stonecutters earn a hving—with lies— 
on the tombs of liars 

A liar looks 'em in the eye 
And lies to a woman, 

Lies to a man, a pal, a child, a fool 

And he is an old liar, we know him many years back. 

A liar lies to nations 
A liar lies to the people 
A liar takes the blood of the people 
And drinks this blood with a laugh and a he, 

A laugh m his neck, 

A he m his mouth 

And this liar is an old one, we know him many years. 
He IS straight as a dog's hind leg 
He IS straight as a corkscrew 
He IS white as a black cat's foot at midnight 

The tongue of a man is tied on this, 

On the liar who lies to nations, 

The liar who lies to the people 
The tongue of a man is tied on this 
And ends To hell with 'em all 
To hell with 'em all 

It's a song hard as a riveter's hammer. 

Hard as the sleep of a crummy hobo, 

Hard as the sleep of a lousy doughboy, 

Twisted as a shell-shock idiot's gibber 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


^93 


The liars met where the doors were locked 
They said to each other Now for war 
The liars fixed it and told 'em Go 

Across their tables they fixed it up, 

Behind their doors away from the mob 
And the guns did a ]ob that nicked off millions 
The guns blew seven million off the map, 

The guns sent seven million west 
Seven million shoving up the daisies 
Across their tables they fixed it up. 

The liars who he to nations 

And now 

Out of the butcher's ]ob 

And the boneyard junk the maggots have cleaned. 

Where the jaws of skulls tell the jokes of war ghosts. 

Out of this they are calling now Let's go back where we were 
Let us run the world again, us, us 

Where the doors are locked the liars say Wait and we'll cash in again 

So I hear The People talk 
I hear them tell each other 
Let the strong men be ready 
Let the strong men watch 
Let your wrists be cool and your head clear 
Let the liars get their finish. 

The liars and their waiting game, waiting a day again 
To open the doors and tell us War* get out to your war again 

So I hear The People tell each other 
Look at today and tomorrow 
Fix this clock that nicks off millions 
When The Liars say it's time 
Take things in your own hands 
To hell with 'em all, 

The liars who he to nations, 

The liars who he to The People 


194 


  


PRAYER AFTER WORLD WAR 

Wandering oversea dreamer, 

Hunting and hoarse, Oh daughter and mother. 
Oh daughter of ashes and mother of blood, 
Child of the hair let down, and tears. 

Child of the cross in the south 
And the star m the north, 

Keeper of Egypt and Russia and France, 

Keeper of England and Poland and Spam, 

Make us a song for tomorrow 

Make us one new dream, us who forget. 

Out of the storm let us have one star 

Struggle, Oh anvils, and help her 
Weave with your wool. Oh winds and skies 
Let your iron and copper help, 

Oh dirt of the old dark earth 

Wandering oversea singer. 

Singing of ashes and blood, 

Child of the scars of fire, 

Make us one new dream, us who forget 
Out of the storm let us have one star 


A E F 

There will be a rusty gun on the wall, sweetheart. 

The rifle grooves curling with flakes of rust 
A spider will make a silver string nest in the 
darkest, warmest corner of it 
The trigger and the range-finder, they too will be rasty 
And no hands will polish the gun, and it will hang on the wall 
Forefingers and thumbs will point absently and casually toward it 
It will be spoken among half-forgotten, wished-to-be-forgotten things 
They will tell the spider Go on, you re doing good work 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


^95 


BAS-RELIEF 

Five geese deploy mysteriously 
Onward proudly with flagstaffs, 
Hearses with silver bugles, 

Bushels of plum-blossoms dropping 
For ten mystic web-feet— 

Each his own drum-ma]or. 

Each charged with the honor 
Of the ancient goose nation, 

Each with a nose-length surpassing 
The nose-lengths of rival nations 
Somberly, slowly, unimpeachably. 
Five geese deploy mysteriously 


CARLOVINGIAN DREAMS 

Count these reminiscences like money 
The Greeks had their picnics under another name 
The Romans wore glad rags and told their neighbors, ''What of it^'' 
The Carlovmgians hauling logs on carts, they too 
Stuck their noses m the air and stuck their thumbs to their noses 
And tasted life as a symphonic dream of fresh eggs broken over a frying 
pan left by an uncle who killed men with spears and short swords 
Count these reminiscences like money 

Dnft, and drift on, white ships 
Sailing the free sky blue, sailing and changing and sailing, 

Oh, I remember in the blood of my dreams how they sang before me 
Oh, they were men and women who got money for their work, money or 
love or dreams 

Sail on, white ships 
Let me have spnng dreams 

Let me count reminiscences like money, let me count picnics, glad rags 
and the great bad manners of the Carlovmgians breaking fresh eggs 
m the copper pans of their proud uncles. 



  


196 


BRONZES 

They ask me to handle bronzes 

Kept by children in China 

Three thousand years 

Since their fathers 

Took fire and molds and hammers 

And made these 

The Ming, the Chou, 

And other dynasties, 

Out, gone, reckoned in ciphers. 

Dynasties dressed up 

In old gold and old yellow— 

They saw these 

Let the wheels 
Of three thousand years 
Turn, turn, turn on 

Let one poet then 
(One will be enough) 

Handle these bronzes 
And mention the dynasties 
And pass them along 


LET LOVE GO ON 

Let it go on, let the love of this hour be poured out till all the answers 
are made, the last dollar spent and the last blood gone 

Time runs with an ax and a hammer, time slides down the hallways with 
a pass-key and a master-key, and time gets by, time wins 

Let the love of this hour go on, let all the oaths and children and people 
of this love be clean as a washed stone under a waterfall in the sun 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


197 


Time IS a young man with ballplayer legs, time runs a winning race 
against life and the clocks, time tickles with rust and spots 

Let love go on, the heartbeats are measured out with a measuring glass, 
so many apiece to gamble with, to use and spend and reckon, let 
love go on 


KILLERS 

I AM put high over all others in the city today 

I am the killer who kills for those who wish a killing today 

Here is a strong young man who killed 

There was a driving wind of city dust and horse dung blowing and he 
stood at an intersection of five sewers and there pumped the bullets 
of an automatic pistol into another man, a fellow citizen 

Therefore, the prosecuting attorneys, fellow citizens, and a jury of his 
peers, also fellow citizens, listened to the testimony of other fellow 
citizens, policemen, doctors, and after a verdict of guilty, the judge, 
a fellow citizen, said I sentence you to be hanged by the neck till 
you are dead 

So there is a killer to be killed and I am the killer of the killer for today 

I don't know why it beats in my head in the lines I read once in an old 
school reader Fm to be queen of the May, mother, Fm to be queen 
of the May 

Anyhow it comes back m language just like that today 

I am the high honorable killer today 

There are five million people m the state, five million killers for whom 
I kill 

I am the killer who kills today for five million killers who wish a killing 


CLEAN HANDS 

It is something to face the sun and know you are free 
To hold your head in the shafts of daylight slanting the earth 
And know your heart has kept a promise and the blood runs clean 
It is something 



198 


  


To go one day of your life among all men with clean hands, 

Clean for the day book today and the record of the after days. 

Held at your side proud, satisfied to the last, and ready, 

So to have clean hands 

God, it IS something. 

One day of life so 

And a memory fastened till the stars sputter out 
And a love washed as white linen in the noon drying 
Yes, go find the men of clean hands one day and see the life, the memory, 
the love they have, to stay longer than the plunging sea wets the 
shores or the fires heave under the crust of the earth 
O yes, clean hands is the chant and only one man knows its sob and its 
undersong and he dies clenching the secret more to him than any 
woman or chum 

And O the great brave men, the silent little brave men, proud of their 
hands— clutching the knuckles of their fingers into fists ready for 
death and the dark, ready for life and the fight, the pay and the 
memories— O the men proud of their hands 


THREE GHOSTS 

Three tailors of Tooley Street wrote We, the People 
The names are forgotten It is a ]oke in ghosts 

Cutters or bushelmen or armhole basters, they sat 
cross-legged stitching, snatched at scissors, stole each 
other s thimbles 

Cross-legged, working for wages, joking each other 
as misfits cut from the cloth of a Master Tailor, 
they sat and spoke their thoughts of the glory of 
The People, they met after work and drank beer to 
The People 


Faded off into the twilights the names are forgotten It is a joke in ghosts 
Let it ride They wrote We, The People 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


199 


PENCILS 


Pencils 

telling where the wind comes from 
open a story 

Pencils 

telling where the wind goes 
end a story 

These eager pencils 
come to a stop 

only when the stars high over 
come to a stop 

Out of cabalistic tomorrows 
come cryptic babies calling life 
a strong and a lovely thing 

I have seen neither these 
nor the stars high over 
come to a stop 

Neither these nor the sea horses 
running with the clocks of the moon 
Nor even a shooting star 
snatching a pencil of fire 
writing a curve of gold and white 

Like you I counted the shooting stars of a 
winter night and my head was dizzy with all 
of them calling one by one 


Look for us again 


200 


  


JUG 

The shale and water thrown together so-so first of all, 

Then a potter's hand on the wheel and his fingers shaping the ]ug, out 
of the mud a mouth and a handle, 

Shmpsy, loose and ready to fall at a touch, fire plays on it, slow fire coax- 
ing all the water out of the shale mix 

Dipped in glaze more fire plays on it till a molasses lava runs m waves, 
rises and retreats, a varnish of volcanoes 

Take it now, out of mud now here is a mouth and handle, out of this 
now mothers will pour milk and maple syrup and cider, vinegar, apple 
juice, and sorghum 

There is nothing proud about this, only one out of many, the potter's 
wheel slings them out and the fires harden them hours and hours 
thousands and thousands. 

''Be good to me, put me down easy on the floors of the new concrete 
houses, I was poured out like a concrete house and baked in fire too " 


AND THIS WILL BE ALL? 

And this will be all? 

And the gates will never open again? 

And the dust and the wind will play around the rusty door hinges and 
the songs of October moan, Why-oh, why-oh? 

And you will look to the mountains 
And the mountains will look to you 
And you will wish you were a mountain 
And the mountain will wish nothing at all? 

This will be all? 

The gates will never-never open again? 

The dust and the wind only 

And the rusty door hinges and moaning October 

And Why-oh, why-oh, in the moaning dry leaves, 

This will be all? 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


201 


Nothing in the air but songs 

And no singers, no mouths to know the songs^ 

You tell us a woman with a heartache tells you it is so? 
This will be alP 


HOODLUMS 

I AM a hoodlum, you are a hoodlum, we and all of us are a world of 
hoodlums— maybe so 

I hate and kill better men than I am, so do you, so do all of us— maybe— 
maybe so 

In the ends of my fingers the itch for another man's neck, I want to see 
him hanging, one of dusk's cartoons against the sunset 

This is the hate my father gave me, this was in my mother's milk, this is 
you and me and all of us in a world of hoodlums— maybe so 

Let us go on, brother hoodlums, let us kill and kill, it has always been 
so, it will always be so, there is nothing more to it 

Let us go on, sister hoodlums, kill, kill, and hll, the torsos of the world's 
mothers are tireless and the loins of the world's fathers are strong— 
so go on— kill, kill, kill 

Lay them deep in the dirt, the stiffs we fixed, the cadavers bumped off, 
lay them deep and let the night winds of winter blizzards howl their 
burial service 

The night winds and the winter, the great white sheets of northern bliz- 
zards, who can sing better for the lost hoodlums the old requiem, 
‘*Kill him! kill himi 

Today my son, tomorrow yours, the day after your next door neighbor's— 
it is all in the wrists of the gods who shoot craps— it is anybody's 
guess whose eyes shut next 

Being a hoodlum now, you and I, being all of us a world of hoodlums, 
let us take up the cry when the mob sluffs by on a thousand shoe 
soles, let us too yammer, ''Kill him^ kill him^ . , 

Let us do this now . for our mothers for our sisters and wives 
... let us kill, hll, hll— for the torsos of the women are tireless 
and the loins of the men are strong 


[CHICAGO, July 29, 1919] 


202 


  


YES, THE DEAD SPEAK TO US 
Yes, the Dead speak to us 

This town belongs to the Dead, to the Dead and to the Wilderness 

Back of the clamps on a fireproof door they hold the papers of the Dead 
in a house here 

And when two living men fall out, when one says the Dead spoke a 
Yes, and the other says the Dead spoke a No, they go then together 
to this house 

They loosen the clamps and haul at the hasps and try their keys and 
curse at the locks and the combination numbers 
For the teeth of the rats are barred and the tongues of the moths are 
outlawed and the sun and the air of wind is not wanted 

They open a box where a sheet of paper shivers, in a dusty corner shivers 
with the dry mkdrops of the Dead, the signed names 
Here the ink testifies, here we find the say-so, here we learn the layout, 
now we know where the cities and farms belong 

Dead white men and dead red men 
tested each other with shot and 
knives they twisted each other's 
necks land was yours if you took and 
kept it 

How are the heads the rain seeps 
in, the ram-washed knuckles in 
sod and gumbo^ 

Where the sheets of paper shiver, 

Back of the hasps and handles, 

Back of the fireproof clamps. 

They read what the fingers scnbbled, who the land belongs to now— it is 
herein provided, it is hereby stipulated— the land and all appurtenances 
thereto and all deposits of oil and gold and coal and silver, and all pockets 
and repositories of gravel and diamonds, dung and permanganese, and all 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


203 


clover and bumblebees, all bluegrass, ]ohnny-]ump-ups, grassroots, springs 
of running water or rivers or lakes or high spreading trees or hazel bushes 
or sumach or thorn-apple branches or high m the air the bird nest with 
spotted blue eggs shaken in the roaming wind of the treetops— 

So it is scrawled here, 

"1 direct and devise 

So and so and such and such,” 

And this IS the last word 
There is nothing more to it 

In a shanty out in the Wilderness, ghosts of tomorrow sit, waiting to 
come and go, to do their ]ob 

They will go into the house of the Dead and take the shivering sheets 
of paper and make a bonfire and dance a deadman's dance over the 
hissing crisp 

In a slang their own the dancers out of the Wilderness will write a paper 
for the living to read and sign 

The dead need peace, the dead need sleep, let the dead have peace and 
sleep, let the papers of the Dead who fix the lives of the Living, let 
them be a hissing crisp and ashes, let the young men and the young 
women forever understand we are through and no longer take the 
say-so of the Dead, 

Let the dead have honor from us with our thoughts of them and our 
thoughts of land and all appurtenances thereto and all deposits of 
oil and gold and coal and silver, and all pockets and repositories of 
gravel and diamonds, dung and permanganese, and all clover and 
bumblebees, all bluegrass, ]ohnny-]ump-ups, grassroots, springs of 
running water or rivers or lakes or high spreading trees or hazel 
bushes or sumach or thorn-apple branches or high in the air the bird 
nest with spotted blue eggs shaken in the roaming wind of the 
treetops 

And so, it IS a shack of ghosts, a lean-to they have in the Wilderness, and 
they are waiting and they have learned strange songs how easy it is 
to wait and how anything comes to those who wait long enough and 
how most of all it is easy to wait for death, and waiting, dream of 
new cities 


CALLS 


Because I have called to you 
as the flame flamingo calls, 
or the want of a spotted hawk 
IS called — 

because m the dusk 
the warblers shoot the running 
waters of short songs to the 
homecoming warblers— 

because 

the cry here is wing to wing 
and song to song — 

I am waiting, 

waiting with the flame flamingo, 
the spotted hawk, the running water 
warbler— 

waiting for you 


SEA-WASH 

The sea-wash never ends 
The sea-wash repeats, repeats 
Only old songs? Is that all the sea knows? 
Only the old strong songs? 

Is that all? 

The sea-wash repeats, repeats 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


205 


SILVER WIND 

Do you know how the dream looms? how if summer misses one of us 
the two of us miss summer— 

Summer when the lungs of the earth take a long breath for the change 
to low contralto singing mornings when the green com leaves first 
break through the black loam— 

And another long breath for the silver soprano melody of the moon 
songs in the light nights when the earth is lighter than a feather, 
the iron mountains lighter than a goose down — 

So I shall look for you m the light nights then, in the laughter of slats 
of silver under a hill hickory. 

In the listening tops of the hickories, in the wind motions of the hickory 
shingle leaves, in the imitations of slow sea water on the shingle 
silver in the wind— 

I shall look for you 


EVENING WATERFALL 

What was the name you called me?— 

And why did you go so soon? 

The crows lift their caw on the wind. 

And the wind changed and was lonely 

The warblers cry their sleepy-songs 
Across the valley gloaming. 

Across the cattle-horns of early stars 

Feathers and people in the crotch of a treetop 
Throw an evening waterfall of sleepy-songs 

What was the name you called me?— 

And why did you go so soon? 



2o6 


  


CRUCIBLE 

Hot gold runs a winding stream on the inside of a green bowl 

Yellow trickles m a fan figure, scatters a line of skirmishers, spreads a 
chorus of dancing girls, performs blazing ochre evolutions, gathers 
the whole show into one stream, forgets the past and rolls on 

The sea-mist green of the bowl's bottom is a dark throat of sky crossed 
by quarreling forks of umber and ochre and yellow changing faces 


SUMMER STARS 

Bend low again, night of summer stars 
So near >ou are, sky of summer stars, 

So near, a long-arm man can pick off stars. 
Pick off what he wants in the sky bowl, 
So near }ou are, summer stars, 

So near, strumming, strumming. 

So lazy and hum-strumming 


THROW ROSES 

Throw roses on the sea where the dead went down 
The roses speak to the sea. 

And the sea to the dead 
Throw roses, 0 lovers— 

Let the leaves wash on the salt in the sun. 


JUST BEFORE APRIL CAME 

The snow-piles in dark places are gone 
Pools by the railroad tracks shine clear 
The gravel of all shallow places shines 
A white pigeon reels and somersaults 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


207 


Frogs plutter and squdge— and frogs beat 
the air with a recurring thin 
steel sliver of melody 

Crows go m fives and tens, they march their 
black feathers past a blue pool, they 
celebrate an old festival 
A spider is trying his webs, a pink bug sits 
on my hand washing his forelegs 
I might ask Who are these people? 


STARS, SONGS, FACES 

Gather the stars if you wish it so 
Gather the songs and keep them 
Gather the faces of women 
Gather for keeping years and years 
And then 

Loosen your hands, let go and say good-by 
Let the stars and songs go 
Let the faces and years go 
Loosen your hands and say good-by 


SANDPIPERS 

Ten miles of flat land along the sea 
Sandland where the salt water kills the sweet potatoes 
Homes for sandpipers— the script of their feet is on the sea shingles— 
they write in the morning, it is gone at noon— they write at noon, it 
is gone at night 

Pity the land, the sea, the ten mile flats, pity anything but the sand- 
pipers’ wire legs and feet 


THREE VIOLINS 

Three violins are trying their hearts 
The piece is MacDowelFs Wild Rose 
And the time of the wild rose 


2o8 


  


And the leaves of the wild rose 
And the dew-shot eyes of the wild rose 
Sing in the air over three violins 
Somebody like you was in the heart of MacDowell 
Somebody like you is in three violins 


THE WIND SINGS WELCOME IN EARLY SPRING 
(For Paula) 

The grip of the ice is gone now 
The silvers chase purple 
The purples tag silver 

They let out their runners 
Here where summer says to the lilies 
“Wish and be wistful, 

Circle this wind-hunted, wind-sung water” 

Come along always, come along now 
You for me, kiss me, pull me by the ear 
Push me along with the wind push 
Sing like the whinnying wind 
Sing like the hustling obstreperous wind 

Have you ever seen deeper purple 
this in my wild wind fingers? 

Could you have more fun with a pony or a goat? 
Have you seen such flicking heels before, 

Silver )ig heels on the purple sky rim? 

Come along always, come along now 


TAWNY 

These are the tawny days your face comes back 

The grapes take on purple the sunsets redden 
early on the trellis. 


The bashful mornings hurl gray mist on the stripes 
of sunrise. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


209 


Creep, silver on the field, the frost is welcome 

Run on, yellow halls on the hills, and you tawny 
pumpkin flowers, chasing your lines of orange 

Tawny days and your face again 


SLIPPERY 

The six month child 
Fresh from the tub 
Wriggles in our hands 
This is our fish child 
Give her a nickname Slippery 


HELGA 

The wishes on this child's mouth 
Came like snow on marsh cranberries, 
The tamarack kept something for her. 
The wind is ready to help her shoes 
The north has loved her, she will be 
A grandmother feeding geese on frosty 
Mornings, she will understand 
Early snow on the cranberries 
Better and better then 


BABY TOES 

There is a blue star, Janet, 

Fifteen years' ride from us. 

If we ride a hundred miles an hour. 

There is a white star, Janet, 

Forty years' nde from us. 

If we ride a hundred miles an hour. 




210 


  


Shall we nde 
To the blue star 
Or the white star? 


PEOPLE WITH PROUD CHINS 

I TELL them where the wind comes from, 

Where the music goes when the fiddle is in the box 

Kids— I saw one with a proud chin, a sleepyhead, 

And the moonhne creeping white on her pillow 
I have seen their heads m the starlight 
And their proud chins marching m a mist of stars 

They are the only people I never he to 
I give them honest answers, 

Answers shrewd as the circles of white on brown chestnuts 


WINTER MILK 

The milk-drops on your chin, Helga, 

Must not interfere with the cranberry red of your cheeks 

Nor the sky winter blue of your eyes 

Let your mammy keep hands off the chin 

This is a high holy spatter of white on the reds and blues 

Before the bottle was taken away. 

Before you so proudly began today 

Drinking your milk from the rim of a cup 

They did not splash this high holy white on your chin 

There are dreams in your eyes, Helga 

Tall reaches of wind sweep the clear blue 

The winter is young yet, so young 

Only a little cupful of winter has touched your lips 

Drink on milk with your lips dreams with your eyes 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


211 


SLEEPYHEADS 

Sleep is a maker of makers Birds sleep Feet cling to a perch* Look at 
the balance Let the legs loosen, the backbone untwist, the head go heavy 
over, the whole works tumbles a done bird off the perch 

Fox cubs sleep The pointed head curls round into hind legs and tail It 
is a ball of red hair It is a muff w^aiting A wind might whisk it in the air 
across pastures and rivers, a cocoon, a pod of seeds The snooze of the 
black nose is in a circle of red hair 

Old men sleep In chimney corners, in rocking chairs, at wood stoves, 
steam radiators They talk and forget and nod and are out of talk with 
closed eyes Forgetting to live Knowing the time has come useless for 
them to live Old eagles and old dogs run and fly in the dreams 

Babies sleep In flannels the papoose faces, the bambino noses, and dodo, 
dodo the song of many matushkas Babies— a leaf on a tree in the spring 
sun A nub of a new thing sucks the sap of a tree in the sun, yes a new 
thing, a what-is-it^ A left hand stirs, an eyelid twutches, the milk in the 
belly bubbles and gets to be blood and a left hand and an eyelid Sleep is 
a maker of makers 


SUMACH AND BIRDS 

If you never came with a pigeon rainbow purple 
Shining in the six o'clock September dusk 
If the red sumach on the autumn roads 
Never danced on the flame of your eyelashes 
If the red-haws never burst in a million 
Crimson fingertwists of your heartcrying 
If all this beauty of yours never crushed me 
Then there are many flying acres of birds for me, 
Many drumming gray wings going home I shall see, 
Many crying voices nding the north wind 



212 


  


WOMEN WASHING THEIR HAIR 

They have painted and sung 

the women washing their hair, 

and the plaits and strands in the sun, 

and the golden combs 

and the combs of elephant tusks 

and the combs of buffalo horn and hoof 

The sun has been good to women, 

drying their heads of hair 

as they stooped and shook their shoulders 

and framed their faces with copper 

and framed their eyes with dusk or chestnut 

The ram has been good to women 
If the ram should forget, 
if the ram left off for a year— 
the heads of women would wither, 
the copper, the dusk and chestnuts, go 

They have painted and sung 
the women washing their hair— 
reckon the sun and ram m, too 


PEACH BLOSSOMS 

What cry of peach blossoms 
let loose on the air today 

I heard with my face thrown 
m the pmk-white of it alP 
in the red whisper of it alP 

What man I heard saying 

Christ, these are beautifuP 


And Christ and Christ was m his mouth, 
over these peach blossoms? 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


213 


HALF MOON IN A HIGH WIND 

Money is nothing now, even if I had it, 

0 mooney moon, yellow half moon. 

Up over the green pines and gray elms. 

Up in the new blue 

Streel, streel, 

White lacey mist sheets of cloud, 

Streel in the blowing of the wind, 

Streel over the blue-and-moon sky. 

Yellow gold half moon It is light 
On the snow, it is dark on the snow, 

Streel, O lacey thin sheets, up in the new blue 

Come down, stay there, move on 

1 want you, I don't, keep all 
There is no song to your singing 
I am hit deep, you dnve far, 

0 mooney yellow half moon. 

Steady, steady, or will you tip over? 

Or will the wind and the streeling 
Thin sheets only pass and move on 
And leave you alone and lovely? 

1 want you, I don't, come down. 

Stay there, move on 
Money is nothing now, even if I had it 


REMORSE 

The horse's name was Remorse 

There were people said, ''Gee, what a nag^" 

And they were Edgar Allan Poe bugs and so 
They called him Remorse 

When he was a gelding 
He flashed his heels to other ponies 
And threw dust m the noses of other ponies 


214 


  


And won his first race and his second 
And another and another and hardly ever 
Came under the wire behind the other runners 

And so, Remorse, who is gone, was the hero of a play 
By Henry Blossom, who is now gone 

What is there to a monicker? Call me anything 
A nut, a cheese, something that the cat brought in 
Nick me with any old name 

Class me up for a fish, a gorilla, a slant head, an egg, a ham 
Only slam me across the ears sometimes and hunt for a white 
star 

In my forehead and twist the bang of my forelock around it 
Make a wish for me Maybe I will light out like a streak of wind 


RIVER MOONS 

The double moon, one on the high backdrop of the west, one on the 
curve of the river face. 

The sky moon of fire and the river moon of water, I am taking these 
home m a basket, hung on an elbow, such a teeny weeny elbow, in 
my head 

I saw them last night, a cradle moon, two horns of a moon, such an earlv 
hopeful moon, such a child's moon for all young hearts to make a 
picture of 

The nver—I remember this like a picture~the river was the upper twist 
of a written question mark 

I know now it takes many many years to write a river, a twist of water 
asking a question 

And white stars moved when the moon moved, and one red star kept burn- 
ing, and the Big Dipper was almost overhead 


SAND SCRIBBLINGS 

The wind stops, the wind begins 
The wind says stop, begin 

A sea shovel scrapes the sand floor 
The shovel changes, the floor changes. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


215 


The sandpipers, maybe they know 
Maybe a three-pointed foot can tell 
Maybe the fog moon they fly to, guesses 

The sandpipers cheep ''Here'" and get away. 
Five of them fly and keep together flying 

Night hair of some sea woman 
Curls on the sand when the sea leaves 
The salt tide without a good-by 

Boxes on the beach are empty 
Shake 'em and the nails loosen 
They have been somewhere 


HOW YESTERDAY LOOKED 

The high horses of the sea broke their white riders 
On the walls that held and counted the hours 
The wind lasted 

Two landbirds looked on and the north and the east 
Looked on and the wind poured cups of foam 
And the evening began 

The old men in the shanties looked on and lit their 
Pipes and the young men spoke of the girls 
For a wild night like this 

The south and the west looked on and the moon came 
When the wind went down and the sea was sorry 
And the singing slow 

Ask how the sunset looked between the wind going 
Down and the moon coming up and I would struggle 
To tell the how of it 

I give you fire here, I give you water, I give you 
The wind that blew them across and across. 

The scooping, mixing wind 


2i6 


  


PAULA 

Nothing else m this song— only your face 
Nothing else here— only your drinking, night-gray eyes 

The pier runs into the lake straight as a rifle barrel 
I stand on the pier and sing how I know you mornings 
It IS not your eyes, your face, I remember 
It IS not your dancing, race-horse feet 
It IS something else I remember you for on the pier mornings 

Your hands are sweeter than nut-brown bread when you touch me 
Your shoulder brushes my arm— a south-west wind crosses the pier 
I forget your hands and your shoulder and I say again 

Nothing else in this song— only your face 
Nothing else here— only your drinking, night-gray eyes. 


LAUGHING BLUE STEEL 

Two fishes swimming in the sea. 

Two birds flying m the air, 

Two chisels on an anvil— maybe 

Beaten, hammered, laughing blue steel to each other— maybe 
Sure I would rather be a chisel with you 

than a fish 

Sure I would rather be a chisel with you 

than a bud 

Take these two chisel-pals, 0 God 
Take ’em and beat 'em, hammer ’em, 

hear ’em laugh 


THEY ASK EACH OTHER WHERE THEY CAME FROM 

Am I the river your white birds fly over? 

Are you the green valley my silver channels roam? 

The two of us a bowl of blue sky day time 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


217 


and a bowl of red stars night time^ 
Who picked you 

out of the first great whirl of nothings 
and threw you here^ 


HOW MUCH? 

How much do you love me, a million bushels? 
Oh, a lot more than that. Oh, a lot more 

And tomorrow maybe only half a busheP 
Tomorrow maybe not even a half a bushel 

And is this your heart arithmetic? 

This IS the way the wind measures the weather 


THROWBACKS 

Somewhere you and I remember we came 
Stairways from the sea and our heads dripping 
Ladders of dust and mud and our hair snarled 
Rags of drenching mist and our hands clawing, climbing 
You and I that snickered m the crotches and comers, 
in the gab of our first talking 

Red dabs of dawn summer mornings and the rain sliding off our shoulders 
summer afternoons 

Was it you and I yelled songs and songs in the nights 
of big yellow moons? 


WIND SONG 

Long ago I learned how to sleep. 

In an old apple orchard where the wind swept by counting its money and 
throwing it away, 

In a wind-gaunt orchard where the limbs forked out and listened or never 
listened at all, 



2i8 


  


In a passel of trees where the branches trapped the wind into whistling, 
'Who, who are you?" 

I slept with my head in an elbow on a summer afternoon and there I took 
a sleep lesson 

There I went away saying I know why they sleep, I know how they trap 
the tricky winds 

Long ago I learned how to listen to the singing wind and how to forget 
and how to hear the deep whine, 

Slapping and lapsing under the day blue and the night stars 
Who, who are you? 

Who can ever forget 
listening to the wind go by 
counting its money 
and throwing it away? 


THREE SPRING NOTATIONS ON BIPEDS 
1 

The down drop of the blackbird, 

The wing catch of arrested flight, 

The stop midway and then off 
off for triangles, circles, loops 
of new hieroglyphs— 

This is ApnPs way a woman 
"O yes, Fm here again and your heart 
knows I was coming " 

2 

White pigeons rush at the sun, 

A marathon of wing feats is on 
"Who most loves danger? Who most loves 
wings? Who somersaults for God's sake 
in the name of wing power 
in the sun and blue 
on an Apnl Thursday?" 

So ten winged heads, ten winged feet, 
race their white forms over Elmhurst 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


219 


They go fast once the ten together were 
a feather of foam bubble, a chrysanthemum 
whirl speaking to silver and azure 

3 

The child is on my shoulders 

In the prairie moonlight the child's legs 
hang over my shoulders 

She sits on my neck and I hear her calling 
me a good horse 

She slides down— and into the moon silver of 
a prairie stream 

She throws a stone and laughs at the clug-clug 


SANDHILL PEOPLE 

I TOOK away three pictures 

One was a white gull forming a half-mile arch from the pines toward Wau- 
kegan 

One was a whistle m the little sandhills, a bird crying either to the sunset 
gone or the dusk come 

One was three spotted waterbirds, zigzagging, cutting scrolls and ]ags, 
writing a bird Sanscrit of wing points, half over the sand, half over 
the water, a half-love for the sea, a half-love for the land 

I took away three thoughts 

One was a thing my people call “love," a shut-in river hunting the sea, 
breaking white falls between tall clefs of hill country 

One was a thing my people call “silence," the wind running over the 
butter faced sand-flowers, running over the sea, and never heard of 
again 

One was a thing my people call “death," neither a whistle in the little 
sandhills, nor a bird Sanscrit of wing points, y^et a coat all the stars 
and seas have worn, yet a face the beach wears between sunset and 
dusk 


220 


  


FAR ROCKAWAY NIGHT TILL MORNING 

What can we say of the night^ 

The fog night, the moon night, 

the fog moon night last night? 

There swept out of the sea a song 
There swept out of the sea- 
torn white plungers 
There came on the coast wind drive 
In the spit of a dnven spray, 

On the boom of foam and rollers, 

The cry of midnight to morning 
Hoi-a-loa 
Hoi-a-loa 
Hoi-a-loa 

Who has loved the night more than I have? 
Who has loved the fog moon night last night 
more than I have? 

Out of the sea that song 

—can I ever forget it? 

Out of the sea those plungers 

—can I remember anything else? 

Out of the midnight morning cry Hoi-a-loa 
—how can I hunt any other songs now? 


HUMMINGBIRD WOMAN 

Why should I be wondenng 
How you would look m black velvet and yellow? 
in orange and green? 

I who cannot remember whether it was a dash of blue 
Or a whirr of red under your willow throat— 

Why do I wonder how you would look in hummingbird feathers? 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


221 


BUCKWHEAT 

1 

There was a late autumn cricket, 

And two smoldering mountain sunsets 
Under the valley roads of her eyes 

There was a late autumn cricket, 

A hangover of summer song, 

Scraping a tune 

Of the late night clocks of summer, 

In the late winter night fireglow. 

This m a circle of black velvet at her neck 

2 

In pansy eyes a flash, a thin rim of white light, a beach bonfire ten miles 
across dunes, a speck of a fool star in nighf s half circle of velvet 

In the corner of the left arm a dimple, a mole, a forget-me-not, and it flut- 
tered a hummingbird wing, a blur in the honey-red clover, m the 
honey-white buckwheat 


BLUE RIDGE 

Born a million years ago you stay here a million years watching the 
women come and live and be laid away you and they thm-gray 
thm-dusk lovely 

So it goes either the early morning lights are lovely or the early morning 
star 

I am glad I have seen racehorses, women, mountains 


222 


  


VALLEY SONG 
The sunset swept 

To the valley’s west, you remember 

The frost was on 
A star burnt blue 
We were warm, you remember. 

And counted the nngs on a moon 

The sunset swept 
To the valley’s west 

And was gone in a big dark door of stars 


MIST FORMS 

The sheets of night mist travel a long valley 
I know why you came at sundown in a scarf mist 

What was it we touched asking nothing and asking alP 
How many times can death come and pay back what we saw^ 

In the oath of the sod, the lips that swore, 

In the oath of night mist, nothing and all, 

A nddle is here no man tells, no woman 


PIGEON 

The flutter of blue pigeon’s wings 
Under a river bridge 
Hunting a clean dry arch, 

A corner for a sleep— 

This flutters here in a woman’s hand 

A singing sleep cry, 

A drunken poignant two lines of song, 
Somebody looking clean into yesterday 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


223 


And remembering, or looking clean into 
Tomorrow, and reading,— 

This sings here as a woman's sleep cry sings 

Pigeon friend of mine, 

Fly on, sing on 


CHASERS 

The sea at its worst dnves a white foam up, 

The same sea sometimes so easy and rocking with green mirrors 
So you were there when the white foam was up 
And the salt spatter and the rack and the dulse— 

You were done fingenng these, and high, higher and higher 
Your feet went and it was your voice went, ''Hai, hai, hai," 
Up where the rocks let nothing live and the grass was gone. 
Not even a hank nor a wisp of sea moss hoping 
Here your feet and your same singing, ''Hai, hai, hai " 

Was there anything else to answer than, “Hai, hai, hai"^ 

Did I go up those same crags yesterday and the day before 
ScrufEng my shoe leather and scraping the tough gnomic stuff 
Of stones woven on a cold criss-cross so long ago^ 

Have I not sat there watching the white foam up, 

The hoarse white lines coming to curve, foam, slip back? 
Didn't I learn then how the call comes, "'Hai, hai, hai"? 


HORSE FIDDLE 

First I would like to write for you a poem to be shouted in the teeth of 
a strong wind 

Next I would like to write one for you to sit on a hill and read down the 
river valley on a late summer afternoon, reading it in less than a whis- 
per to Jack on his soft wire legs learning to stand up and preach, Jack- 
in-the-pulpit 

As many poems as I have written to the moon and the streaming of the 
moon spinners of light, so many of the summer moon and the winter 


224 


  


moon I would like to shoot along to your ears for nothing, for a laugh, 
a song, 

for nothing at all, 

for one look from you, 

for your face turned away 

and your voice in one clutch 

half way between a tree-wind moan 

and a night-bird sob 

Believe nothing of it all, pay me nothing, open your window for the other 
singers and keep it shut for me 

The road I am on is a long road and I can go hungry again like I have gone 
hungry before 

What else have I done nearly all my life than go hungry and go on singing? 

Leave me with the hoot owl 
I have slept in a blanket listening 
He learned it, he must have learned it 
From two moons, the summer moon 
And the winter moon 

And the streaming of the moon spinners of light 


TIMBER WINGS 

There was a wild pigeon came often to Hinkley’s timber 

Gray wings that wrote their loops and triangles on the walnuts and the 
hazel 

There was a wild pigeon 

There was a summer came year by year to HinWey’s timber. 

Rainy months and sunny and pigeons calling and one pigeon best of all 
who came 

There was a summer 

It is so long ago I saw this wild pigeon and listened 

It IS so long ago I heard the summer song of the pigeon who told me why 
night comes, why death and stars come, why the whippoorwill remem- 
bers three notes only and always. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


225 


It IS SO long ago, it is like now and today, the gray-wing pigeon’s way of 
telling it all, telling it to the walnuts and hazel, telling it to me 
So there is memory 

So there is a pigeon, a summer, a gray wing beating my shoulder 


NIGHT STUFF 

Listen a while, the moon is a lovely woman, a lonely woman, lost in a 
silver dress, lost m a circus nder’s silver dress 

Listen a while, the lake by night is a lonely woman, a lovely woman, circled 
with birches and pines mixing their green and white among stars shat- 
tered in spray clear nights 

I know the moon and the lake have twisted the roots under my heart the 
same as a lonely woman, a lovely woman, in a silverr dress, in a circus 
rider’s silver dress 


SPANISH 

Fasten black eyes on me 
I ask nothing of you under the peach trees, 

Fasten your black eyes in my gray 
with the spear of a storm 

The air under the peach blossoms is a haze of pink 


SHAG-BARK HICKORY 

In the moonlight under a shag-bark hickory tree 
Watching the yellow shadows melt m hoof-pools. 
Listening to the yes and the no of a woman’s hands, 
I kept my guess why the night was glad 

The night was lit with a woman’s eyes 
The night was crossed with a woman’s hands. 

The night kept humming an undersong 



226 


  


THE SOUTH WIND SAYS SO 

If the oriole calls like last year 

when the south wind sings in the oats, 

if the leaves climb and climb on a bean pole 

saying over a song learnt from the south wind, 

if the crickets send up the same old lessons 

found when the south wind keeps on coming, 

we will get by, we will keep on coming, 

we will get by, we will come along, 

we will fix our hearts over, 

the south wind says so 


ACCOMPLISHED FACTS 

Every year Emily Dickinson sent one fnend 
the first arbutus bud in her garden 

In a last will and testament Andrew Jackson 
remembered a friend with the gift of George 
Washington's pocket spy-glass 

Napoleon too, in a last testament, mentioned a silver 
watch taken from the bedroom of Frederick the Great, 
and passed along this trophy to a particular friend 




SMOKE AND STEEL 


227 


O Henry took a blood carnation from his coat lapel 
and handed it to a country girl starting work in a 
bean bazaar, and scribbled “Peach blossoms may or 
may not stay pink in city dust 

So it goes Some things we buy, some not 
Tom Jefferson was proud of his radishes, and Abe 
Lincoln blacked his own boots, and Bismarck called 
Berlin a wilderness of brick and newspapers 

So it goes There are accomplished facts 
Ride, ride, ride on in the great new blimps— 

Cross unheard-of oceans, circle the planet 
When you come back we may sit by five hollyhocks 
We might listen to boys fighting for marbles 
The grasshopper will look good to us 

So it goes 


GRIEG BEING DEAD 

Grieg being dead we may speak of him and his art 

Grieg being dead we can talk about whether he was any good or not 

Grieg being with Ibsen, Bjornson, Lief Ericson and the rest, 

Grieg being dead does not care a helFs hoot what we say 

Morning, Spring, Anitra's Dance, 

He dreams them at the doors of new stars. 


CHORDS 

In the morning, a Sunday morning, shadows of sea and adumbrants of 
rock in her eyes horseback in leather boots and leather gauntlets 
by the sea 

In the evening, a Sunday evening, a rope of pearls on her white shoulders 
and a speaking, brooding black velvet, relapsing to the voiceless 



228 


  


battering Russian marches on a piano drive of blizzards 
across Nebraska 

Yes, nding horseback on hills by the sea sitting at the ivory keys in 
black velvet, a rope of pearls on white shoulders 


BOGHEADS 

Among the grassroots 
In the moonlight, who comes circling, 
red tongues and high noses? 

Is one of ’em Buck and one of ’em 
White Fang? 

In the moonlight, who are they, cross-legged, 
telling their stones over and over? 

Is one of ’em Martin Eden and one of ’em Larsen 
the Wolf? 

Let an epitaph read 

He loved the straight eyes of dogs 
and the strong heads of men 


TRINITY PLACE 

The grave of Alexander Hamilton is in Trinity yard at the end of Wall 
Street 

The grave of Robert Fulton likewise is in Tnnity yard where Wall Street 
stops. 

And m this yard stenogs, bundle boys, scrabwomen, sit on the tombstones, 
and walk on the grass of graves, speaking of war and weather, of 
babies, wages and love 

An iron picket fence . and streaming thousands along Broadway 
sidewalks straw hats, faces, legs a singing, talking, hustling 
down the great street that ends with a Sea 


nver 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


229 


easy is the sleep of Alexander Hamilton 

easy is the sleep of Robert Fulton 

easy are the great governments and the great steamboats 


PORTRAIT 
(ForS A) 

To write one book in five years 
or five books in one year, 
to be the painter and the thing painted, 
where are we, bo^ 

Wait— -get his number 

The barber shop handling is here 

and the tweeds, the cheviot, the Scotch Mist, 

and the flame orange scarf 

Yet there is more— he sleeps under bridges 
with lonely crazy men, he sits in country 
]ails with bootleggers, he adopts the children 
of broken-down burlesque actresses, he has 
cried a heart of tears for Windy MacPherson's 
father, he pencils wrists of lonely women 

Can a man sit at a desk in a skyscraper in Chicago 
and be a harnessmaker in a com town in Iowa 
and feel the tall grass coming up in June 
and the ache of the cottonwood trees 
singing with the prairie wind^ 


POTOMAC RIVER MIST 

All the policemen, saloonkeepers and efficiency experts in Toledo knew 
Bern Dailey, secretary ten years when Whitlock was mayor. 
Pickpockets, yeggs, three card men, he knew them all and how they flit 
from zone to zone, birds of wmd and weather, singers, fighters, 
scavengers 



230 


  


The Washington monument pointed to a new moon for us and a gang 
from over the river sang ragtime to a ukulele 
The river mist marched up and down the Potomac, we hunted the fog- 
swept Lincoln Memorial, white as a blonde woman's arm 
We circled the city of Washington and came back home four o'clock m 
the morning, passing a sign House Where Abraham Lincoln Died, 
Admission 25 Cents 

I got a letter from him in Sweden and I sent him a postcard from Norway 
. every newspaper from America ran news of '‘the flu " 

The path of a night fog swept up the river to the Lincoln Memorial when 
I saw it again and alone at a winter's end, the marble in the mist 
white as a blonde woman's arm 


JACK LONDON AND O HENRY 

Both were ]ailbirds, no speechmakers at all, 
speaking best with one foot on a brass rail, 
a beer glass m the left hand and the light 
hand employed for gestures 

And both were lights snuffed out no warning 
no lingering 

Who knew the hearts of these boozefighters? 


HIS OWN FACE HIDDEN 

Hokusai’s portrait of himself 

Tells what his hat was like 

And his arms and legs The only faces 

Are a river and a mountain 

And two laughing farmers 

The smile of Hokusai 
IS under his hat 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


231 


CUPS OF COFFEE 

The haggard woman with a hacking cough and a deathless love whispers 
of white flowers in your poem you pour like a cup of coffee, 
Gabriel 

The slim girl whose voice was lost in the waves of flesh piled on her 
bones and the woman who sold to many men and saw her 
breasts shrivel in two poems you pour these like a cup of coffee, 
Francois 

The woman whose lips are a thread of scarlet, the woman whose feet take 
hold on hell, the woman who turned to a memorial of salt looking 
at the lights of a forgotten city in your affidavits, ancient Jews, 
you pour these like cups of coffee 

The woman who took men as snakes take rabbits, a rag and a bone and 
a hank of hair, she whose eyes called men to sea dreams and shark's 
teeth in a poem you pour this like a cup of coffee. Kip 

Marching to the footlights in night robes with spots of blood, marching 
in white sheets muffling the faces, marching with heads in the air 
they come back and cough and cry and sneer in your poems, 
men, you pour these like cups of coffee 



SMOKE ROSE GOLD 


The dome of the capitol looks to the Potomac river 
Out of haze over the sunset, 

Out of a smoke rose gold 
One star shines over the sunset 

Night takes the dome and the river, the sun and the smoke rose gold. 

The haze changes from sunset to star 

The pour of a thin silver struggles against the dark 

A star might call It’s a long way across 


TANGIBLES 

I HAVE seen this city in the day and the sun 

I have seen this city in the night and the moon 

And in the night and the moon I have seen a thing this city gave me 
nothing of in the day and the sun 

The float of the dome in the day and the sun is one thing 

The float of the dome in the night and the moon is another thing 

In the night and the moon the float of the dome is a dream-whisper, a 
croon of a hope “Not today, child, not today, lover, maybe tomorrow, 
child, maybe tomorrow, lover.” 

Can a dome of iron dream deeper than living men? 

Can the float of a shape hovenng among tree-tops— can this speak an 
oratory sad, singing and red beyond the speech of the living men? 

A mother of men, a sister, a lover, a woman past the dreams of the living— 

Does she go sad, singing and red out of the float of this dome? 

There is something . here . men die for. 

[WASHINGTON, AugUSt, IpiS] 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


235 


NIGHT MOVEMENT-NEW YORK 

In the night, when the sea-winds take the city in their arms. 

And cool the loud streets that kept their dust noon and afternoon. 
In the night, when the sea-birds call to the lights of the city. 

The lights that cut on the skyline their name of a city. 

In the night, when the trains and wagons start from a long way off 
For the city where the people ask bread and want letters, 

In the night the city lives too— the day is not all 

In the night there are dancers dancing and singers singing. 

And the sailors and soldiers look for numbers on doors 
In the night the sea-winds take the city in their arms 


NORTH ATLANTIC 

When the sea is everywhere 
from horizon to horizon 
when the salt and blue 
fill a circle of horizons 
I swear again how I know 
the sea is older than anything else 
and the sea younger than anything else 

My first father was a landsman 
My tenth father was a sea-lover, 
a gypsy sea-boy, a singer of chanties 
(Oh Blow the Man Down') 

The sea is always the same 
and yet die sea always changes 

The sea gives all, 

and yet the sea keeps somethmg back 

The sea takes without asking. 

The sea IS a worker, a thief and a loafer 
Why does the sea let go so slow? 

Or never let go at all? 



  


2S4 


The sea always the same 

day after day, 

the sea always the same 

night after night, 

fog on fog and never a star, 

wind on wind and running white sheets, 

bird on bird always a sea-bird— 

so the days get lost 

it IS neither Saturday nor Monday, 

it IS any day or no day, 

it IS a year, ten years 

Fog on fog and never a star, 
what IS a man, a child, a woman, 
to the green and grinding sea^ 

The ropes and boards squeak and groan 

On the land they know a child they have named Today 
On the sea they know three children they have named 
Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow 

I made a song to a woman —-it ran 
I have wanted you 
I have called to you 
on a day I counted a thousand years 

In the deep of a sea-blue noon 

many women run m a man's head, 

phantom women leaping from a man's forehead 

to the railings into the sea to the 
sea rim 

a man's mother ♦ . a man's wife other 

women 

I asked a sure-footed sailor how and he said, 

I have known many women but there is only one sea 

I saw the North Star once 
and our old friend. The Big Dipper, 
only the sea between us 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


235 


'Take away the sea 
and I lift The Dipper, 
swing the handle of it, 
drink from the brim of it 

I saw the North Star one night 
and five new stars for me in the rigging ropes, 
and seven old stars in the cross of the wireless 
plunging by night, 
plowing by night— 

Five new cool stars, seven old warm stars 

I have been let down in a thousand graves 
by my kinfolk 

I have been left alone with the sea and the sea's 
wife, the wind, for my last friends 
And my kinfolk never knew anything about it at all 

Salt from an old work of eating our graveclothes is here 
The sea-kin of my thousand graves. 

The sea and the sea's wife, the wind, 

They are all here tonight 

between the circle of horizons, 
between the cross of the wireless 
and the seven old warm stars 
Out of a thousand sea-holes I came yesterday 
Out of a thousand sea-holes I come tomorrow 

I am km of the changer 

I am a son of the sea 
and the sea's wife, the wind 


FOG PORTRAIT 

Rings of iron gray smoke, a woman's steel face , looking . . looking 

Funnels of an ocean liner negotiating a fog night, pouring a taffy mass 
down the wind, layers of soot on the top deck, a taffiail . and a 
woman's steel face . looking looking 



2^6 


  


Cliffs challenge humped, sudden arcs form on a gull's wing m the storm's 
vortex, miles of white horses plow through a stony beach, stars, clear 
sky, and everywhere free climbers calling, and a woman's steel face 
looking looking 


FLYING FISH 

I HAVE lived in many half-worlds myself and so I know you 

I leaned at a deck rail watching a monotonous sea, the same circling birds 
and the same plunge of furrows carved by the plowing keel 

I leaned so and you fluttered struggling between two waves in the 
air now and then under the water and out again a fish 
a bird a fin thing a wing thing 

Child of water, child of air, fin thing and wing thing . I have lived m 
many half-worlds myself and so I know you 


HOME THOUGHTS 

The sea rocks have a green moss. 

The pine rocks have red berries 
I have memories of you 

Speak to me of how you miss me 
Tell me the hours go long and slow 

Speak to me of the drag on your heart. 

The iron drag of the long days 

I know hours empty as a beggar's tin cup on a rainy day, empty as a sol- 
dier's sleeve with an arm lost 


Speak to me . , 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


237 


IN THE SHADOW OF THE PALACE 

Let us go out of the fog, John, out of the filmy persistent drizzle on the 
streets of Stockholm, let us put down the collars of our raincoats, take 
off our hats and sit in the newspaper ofBce 

Let us sit among the telegrams — clickety-click — the kaisers crown goes 
into the gutter and the Hohenzollern throne of a thousand years falls 
to pieces a one-hoss shay 

It IS a fog night out and the umbrellas are up and the collars of the rain- 
coats— and all the steamboats up and down the Baltic sea have their 
lights out and the wheelsmen sober 

Here the telegrams come— one king goes and another— butter is costly 
there is no butter to buy for our bread in Stockholm— and a little 
patty of butter costs more than all the crowns of Germany. 

Let us go out in the fog, John, let us roll up our raincoat collars and go 
on the streets where men are sneering at the kings 


TWO ITEMS 

Strong rocks hold up the riksdag bndge . always strong river waters 
shoving their shoulders against them 

In the riksdag tonight three hundred men are talking to each other about 
more potatoes and bread for the Swedish people to eat this winter. 

In a boat among calm waters next to the running waters a fisherman sits 
m the dark and I, leaning at a parapet, see him lift a net and let it 
down he waits the waters run , the riksdag talks 
he lifts the net and lets it down 

Stars lost m the sky ten days of drizzle spread over the sky saying yes-yes 


Every afternoon at four o'clock fifteen apple women who have sold their 
apples in Christiania meet at a coffee house and gab 
Every morning at nine o'clock a girl wipes the windows of a hotel across 
the street from the post oflSce m Stockholm 



2^8 


  


I have pledged them when I go to California next summer and see the 
orange groves splattered with yellow balls 
I shall remember other people half way round the world 


STREETS TOO OLD 

I WALKED among the streets of an old city and the streets were lean as the 
throats of hard seafish soaked in salt and kept in barrels many years 
How old, how old, how old, we are —the walls went on saying, street walls 
leaning toward each other like old women of the people, like old mid- 
wives tired and only doing what must be done 
The greatest the city could offer me, a stranger, was statues of the kings, 
on all corners bronzes of kings— ancient bearded kings who wrote 
books and spoke of God's love for all people— and young kings who 
took forth armies out across the frontiers splitting the heads of their 
opponents and enlarging their kingdoms 
Strangest of all to me, a stranger in this old city, was the murmur always 
whistling on the winds twisting out of the armpits and fingertips of 
the kings m bronze —Is there no loosening^ Is this for always^ 

In an early snowflurry one cried —Pull me down where the tired old mid- 
wives no longer look at me, throw the bronze of me to a fierce fire 
and make me into neckchains for dancing children 


SAVOIR FAIRE 

Cast a bronze of my head and legs and put them on the king's street 

Set the cast of me here alongside Carl XII, making two Carls for the 
Swedish people and the utlanders to look at between the palace and 
the Grand Hotel 

The summer sun will shine on both the Carls, and November drizzles 
wrap the two, one m tall leather boots, one in wool leggings 

Also I place it m the record the Swedish people may name boats after 
me or change the name of a long street and give it one of my nick- 
names. 

The old men who beset the soil of Sweden and own the titles to the land 
—the old men who en]oy a silken shimmer to their chin whiskers 
when they promenade the streets named after old kings— if they for- 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


239 


get me— the old men whose vancose veins stand more and more blue 
on the calves of their legs when they take their morning baths at- 
tended by old women born to the bath service of old men and young 
— if these old men say another King Carl should have a bronze on the 
king's street rather than a Fool Carl- 
Then I would hurl them only another fool's laugh— 

I would remember last Sunday when I stood on a Jutland of fire-born red 
granite watching the drop of the sun in the middle of the afternoon 
and the full moon shining over Stockholm four o'clock in the after- 
noon 

If the young men will read five lines of one of my poems I will let the 
kings have all the bronze— I ask only that one page of my writings be 
a knapsack keepsake of the young men who are the bloodkm of those 
who laughed nine hundred years ago We are afraid of nothing— 
only— the sky may fall on us 


MOHAMMED BEK HADJETLACHE 

This Mohammedan colonel from the Caucasus yells with his voice and 
wigwags with his arms 

The interpreter translates, '1 was a friend of Kornilov, he asks me what 
to do and I tell him " 

A stub of a man, this Mohammedan colonel a projectile shape 
a bald head hammered 

''Does he fight or do they put him m a cannon and shoot him at the 
enemy?" 

This fly-by-mght, this bull-roarer who knows everybody 

"I write forty books, history of Islam, history of Europe, true religion, 
scientific farming, I am the Roosevelt of the Caucasus, I go to 
America and ride horses in the moving pictures for $500,000, you 
get $50,000 " 

"I have 30,000 acres in the Caucasus, I have a stove factory in Petrograd 
the bolsheviks take from me, I am an old fnend of the Czar, I am an 
old family friend of Clemenceau . 

These hands strangled three fellow workers for the czanst restoration, took 
their money, sent them in sacks to a river bottom . and scandal- 
ized Stockholm with his gang of strangler women 

Mid-sea strangler hands rise before me illustrating a wish, "I nde horses 


240 


  


for the moving pictures in America, $500,000, and you get ten per 
cent 

This nder of fugitive dawns 


HIGH CONSPIRATORIAL PERSONS 

Out of the testimony of such reluctant lips, out of the oaths and mouths 
of such scrupulous liars, out of perjurers whose hands swore by God 
to the white sun before all men. 

Out of a rag saturated with smears and smuts gathered from the footbaths 
of kings and the loin cloths of whores, from the scabs of Babylon and 
Jerusalem to the scabs of London and New York, 

From such a rag that has wiped the secret sores of kings and overlords 
across the millenniums of human marches and babblings. 

From such a rag perhaps I shall wnng one reluctant desperate drop of 
blood, one honest-to-God spot of red speaking a mother-heart 

[CHRISTIANIA, NORWAY, December, 1918] 


BALTIC FOG NOTES 

Seven days all fog, all mist, and the turbines pounding through high seas 
I was a plaything, a rat’s neck in the teeth of a scuffling mastiff 
Fog and fog and no stars, sun, moon 

Then an afternoon in fjords, low-lying lands scrawled in granite languages 
on a gray sky, 

A night harbor, blue dusk mountain shoulders against a night sky, 

And a circle of lights blinking Ninety thousand people here 

Among the Wednesday night thousands in galoshes and coats 
shckered for ram, 

I learned how hungry I was for streets and people , 

I would rather be water than anything else, 

I saw a dnve of salt fog and mist in the North Atlantic and an iceberg 
dusky as a cloud in the gray of morning 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


241 


And I saw the dream pools of fjords m Norway . . and the scarf of 
dancing water on the rocks and over the edges of mountain shelves 

Bury me m a mountain graveyard m Norway. 

Three tongues of water sing around it with snow from the mountains 

Bury me in the North Atlantic 

A fog there from Iceland will be a murmur in gray over me and a long 
deep wind sob always 

Bury me m an Illinois cornfield 

The blizzards loosen their pipe organ voluntanes in wmter stubble and 
the spring rams and the fall rains bring letters from the sea 

[bekgen] 



CIRCLES OF DOORS 

I LOVE him, I love him, ran the patter of her lips 
And she formed his name on her tongue and sang 
And she sent him word she loved him so much. 

So much, and death was nothing, work, art, home. 
All was nothing if her love for him was not first 
Of all, the patter of her lips ran, I love him, 

I love him, and he knew the doors that opened 
Into doors and more doors, no end of doors. 

And full-length mirrors doubling and triphng 
The appantions of doors circhng comdors of 
Looking-glasses and doors, some with knobs, some 



243   

With no knobs, some opening slow to a heavy push. 
And some jumping open at a touch and a hello 
And he knew if he so wished he could follow her 
Swift running through circles of doors, hearing 
Sometimes her whisper, I love him, I love him. 

And sometimes only a high chaser of laughter 
Somewhere five or ten doors ahead or five or ten 
Doors behind, or chittering h-$t, h-st, among comers 
Of the tall full-length dusty looking-glasses. 

I love, I love, I love, she sang short and quick in 
High thin beaten soprano and he knew the meanings. 
The high chaser of laughter, the doors on doors 
And the looking-glasses, the room to room hunt. 
The ends opening into new ends always 


HATE 

One man killed another The saying between them had been “I’d give you 
the shirt off my back ” 

The killer wept over the dead The dead if he looks back knows the killer 
was sorry It was a shot in one second of hate out of ten years of love 

Why IS the sun a red ball in the six o’clock mist? 

Why IS the moon a tumbling chimney? tumbling tumbling 

“I’d give you the shirt off my back” And I’ll kill you if my 
head goes wrong 


TWO STRANGERS BREAKFAST 

The law says you and I belong to each other, George 
The law says you are mine and I am yours, George 
And there are a million miles of white snowstorms, a million furnaces of 
hell. 

Between the chair where you sit and the chair where I sit 
The law says two strangers shall eat breakfast together after nights on the 
hom of an Arctic moon 


SMOKE AKD STEEL 


243 


SNOW 

Snow took us away from the smoke valleys into white mountains, we saw 
velvet blue cows eating a vermilion grass and they gave us a pink 
milk 

Snow changes our bones into fog streamers caught by the wind and spelled 
into many dances 

Six bits for a sniff of snow in the old days bought us bubbles beautiful to 
forget floating long-arm women across sunny autumn hills 

Our bones cry and cry, no let-up, cry their telegrams 

More, more— a yen is on, a long yen and God only knows when it will 
end 

In the old days six bits got us snow and stopped the yen — now the govern- 
ment says No, no, when our bones cry their telegrams More, more 

The blue cows are dying, no more pink milk, no more floating long-arm 
women, the hills are empty— us for the smoke valleys— sneeze and 
shiver and croak, you dopes— the government says No, no 


DANCER 

The lady m red, she in the chile con came red, 

Bnlhant as the shine of a pepper cnmson in the summer sun. 

She behind a false-face, the much sought-after dancer, the most sought- 
after dancer of all in this masquerade. 

The lady m red sox and red hat, ankles of willow, crimson arrow amidst 
the Spanish clashes of music, 

I sit in a comer 

watching her dance first with one man 
and then another. 


244 


  


PLASTER 

“I KNEW a real man once,” says Agatha m the splendor of a shagbark 
hickory tree 

Did a man touch his lips to Agatha^ Did a man hold her in his arms? Did 
a man only look at her and pass by? 

Agatha, far past forty in a splendor of remembrance, says, 'T knew a real 
man once ” 


CURSE OF A RICH POLISH PEASANT ON HIS SISTER WHO 
RAN AWAY WITH A WILD MAN 

Feliksowa has gone again from our house and this time for good, I hope 
She and her husband took with them the cow father gave them, and they 
sold it 

She went like a swine, because she called neither on me, her brother, nor 
on her fatlier, before leaving for those forests 
That IS where she ought to live, with bears, not with men 
She was something of an ape before and there, with her wild husband, she 
became altogether an ape 
No honest person would have done as they did 

Whose fault is it? And how much they have cursed me and their father' 
May God not punish them for it They think only about money, they let 
the church go if they can only live fat on their money 


WOMAN WITH A PAST 

There was a woman tore off a red velvet gown 
And slashed the white skin of her right shoulder 
And a cnmson zigzag wrote a finger nail hurry 

There was a woman spoke six short words 
And quit a life that was old to her 
For a life that was new. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


245 


There was a woman swore an oath 
And gave hoarse whisper to a prayer 
And it was all over 

She was a thief and a whore and a kept woman. 
She was a thing to be used and played with 
She wore an ancient scarlet sash 

The story is thin and wavenng, 

White as a face m the first apple blossoms, 
White as a birch in the snow of a winter moon 

The story is never told 

There are white lips whisper alone. 

There are red lips whisper alone 

In the cool of the old walls. 

In the white of the old walls. 

The red song is over 


WHITE HANDS 

For the second time in a year this lady with the white hands is brought 
to the west room second floor of a famous sanatorium 
Her husband is a cornice manufacturer in an Iowa town and the lady has 
often read papers on Victonan poets before the local literary club 
Yesterday she washed her hands forty-seven times during her waking 
hours and in her sleep moaned restlessly attempting to clean imag- 
inary soiled spots oS her hands 

Now the head physician touches his chin with a crooked forefinger 


AN ELECTRIC SIGN GOES DARK 
Poland, France, Judea ran in her veins, 

Singing to Pans for bread, singing to Gotham in a fizz at the pop of a 
bottle's cork 


246 


  


"Won't you come and play wiz me" she sang * and ""I just can't make 
my eyes behave " 

"'Higgeldy-Piggeldv/' 'Tapa's Wife/' ""Follow Me" were plays 

Did she wash her feet in a tub of milk? Was a strand of pearls sneaked 
from her trunks The newspapers asked 

Cigarettes, tulips, pacing horses, took her name 

Twenty years old thirty forty 

Forty-five and the doctors fathom nothing, the doctors quarrel, the doc- 
tors use silver tubes feeding twenty-four quarts of blood into the veins, 
the respects of a prize-fighter, a cab driver 

And a little mouth moans It is easy to die when they are dying so many 
grand deaths in France 

A voice, a shape, gone 

A baby bundle from Warsaw legs, torso, head on a hotel bed 
at The Savoy 

The white chiselings of flesh that flung themselves in somersaults, strad- 
dles, for packed houses 

A memory, a stage and footlights out, an electric sign on Broadway dark 

She belonged to somebody, nobody 

No one man owned her, no ten nor a thousand 

She belonged to many thousand men, lovers of the white chiseling of 
arms and shoulders, the ivory of a laugh, the bells of song 

Railroad brakemen taking trains across Nebraska prairies, lumbermen 
jaunting in pine and tamarack of the Northwest, stock ranchers in 
the middle west, mayors of southern cities 

Say to their pals and wives now I see by the papers Anna Held is dead 


THEY BUY WITH AN EYE TO LOOKS 

The fine cloth of your love might be a fabric of Egypt, 
Something Sinbad, the sailor, took away from robbers, 
Something a traveler with plenty of money might pick up 
And bring home and stick on the walls and say 
""There's a little thing made a hit with me 


SMOKE ANP STEEL 


24J 


When I was jn Cairo — I think I must see Cairo again some day 
So there are cornice manufacturers, chewing-gum kings. 

Young Napoleons who corner eggs or corner cheese, 

Phenoms looking for more worlds to corner. 

And still other phenoms who lard themselves in 
And make a killing in steel, copper, permanganese. 

And they say to random friends in for a call 
''Have you had a look at my wife? Here she is 
Haven't I got her dolled up for fair?" 

O-ee* the fine cloth of your love might be a fabric of Egypt. 


PROUD AND BEAUTIFUL 

After you have spent all the money modistes and manicures and man- 
nikins will take for fixing you over into a thing the people on the 
streets call proud and beautiful. 

After the shops and fingers have worn out all they have and know and 
can hope to have and know for the sake of making you what the 
people on the streets call proud and beautiful, 

After there is absolutely nothing more to be done for the sake of staging 
you as a great enigmatic bird of paradise and they must all declare 
you to be proud and beautiful. 

After you have become the last word in good looks, in so far as good looks 
may be fixed and formulated, then, why then, there is nothing more 
to it then, it IS then you listen and see how voices and eyes declare 
you to be proud and beautiful 


TELEGRAM 

I SAW a telegram handed a two hundred pound man at a desk And the 
little scrap of paper charged the air like a set of crystals in a chemist's 
tube to a whispering pinch of salt 

Cross my heart, the two hundred pound man had ]ust cracked a ]oke 
about a new hat he got his wife, when the messenger boy slipped in 
and asked him to sign He gave the boy a nickel, tore the envelope 
and read 

Then he yelled "Good God," jumped for his hat and raincoat, ran for the 
elevator and took a taxi to a railroad depot 


248 


  


As I say, it was like a set of crystals in a chemist’s tube and a whispenng 
pinch of salt 

I wonder what Diogenes who lived in a tub in the sun would have com- 
mented on the affair 

I know a shoemaker who works m a cellar slamming half-soles onto 
shoes, and when I told him, he said. “I pay my bills, I love my wife, 
and I am not afraid of anybody.” 


GLIMMER 

Let down your braids of hair, lady 
Cross your legs and sit before the looking-glass 
And gaze long on lines under your eyes 
Life writes, men dance 

And you know how men pay women 


WHITE ASH 

Theke is a woman on Michigan Boulevard keeps a parrot and goldfish 
and two white mice 

She used to keep a houseful of girls in kimonos and three pushbuttons 
on the front door 

Now she is alone with a panot and goldfish and two white mice 
but these are some of her thoughts 

The love of a soldier on furlough or a sailor on shore leave bums with 
a bonfire red and saffron 

The love of an emigrant workman whose wife is a thousand miles away 
bums With a blue smoke 

'The love of a young man whose sweetheart mamed an older man for 
money burns with a sputtenng uncertain flame. 

And there is a love . one in a thousand . bums clean and is gone 
leaving a white ash 

And this IS a thought she never explains to the parrot and goldfish and 
two white mice. 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


249 


TESTIMONY REGARDING A GHOST 

The roses slanted cnmson sobs 
On the night-sky hair of the women. 
And the long light-fingered men 
Spoke to the dark-haired women, 
"Nothing lovelier, nothing lovelier ” 
How could he sit there among us all 
Guzzling blood into his guts. 

Goblets, mugs, buckets— 

Leaning, toppling, laughing 
With a slobber on his mouth, 

A smear of red on his strong raw lips. 

How could he sit there 

And only two or three of us see him? 

There was nothing to it 
He wasn’t there at all, of course 

The roses leaned from the pots 
The sprays shot roses gold and red 
And the roses slanted cnmson sobs 
In the night-sky hair 
And the voices chattered on the way 
To the frapp6, speaking of pictures. 
Speaking of a stnp of black velvet 
Crossing a girlish woman’s throat, 
Speaking of the mysbc music flash 
Of pots and sprays of roses, 

“Nothing lovelier, nothing lovelier.” 


PUT OFF THE WEDDING FIVE TIMES AND NOBODY 
COMES TO IT 
{Handbook for Quarreling Lovers) 

I THOUGHT of offenng you apothegms. 

I might have said, “Dogs bark and the wind carries it away ” 

I might have said, “He who would make, a door of gold must knock a 
nail m every day” 


2$0 


  


So easy, so easy it would have been to inaugurate a high impetuous mo- 
ment for you to look on before the final farewells were spoken 

You who assumed the farewells m the manner of people buying news- 
papers and reading the headlines — and all peddlers of gossip who 
buttonhole each other and wag their heads saying, “Yes, I heard all 
about it last Wednesday ” 

I considered several apothegms 

“There is no love but service,” of course, would only initiate a quarrel 
over who has served and how and when 

“Love stands against fire and flood and much bitterness,” would only 
initiate a second misunderstanding, and bickerings with lapses of 
silence 

What IS there m the Bible to cover our case, or Shakespeare^ What poetry 
can help? Is there any left but Epictetus? 

Since you have already chosen to interpret silence for language and 
silence for despair and silence for contempt and silence for all things 
but love. 

Since you have already chosen to read ashes where God knows there was 
something else than ashes. 

Since Silence and ashes are two identical findings for your eyes and there 
are no apothegms worth handing out like a hung )ury’s verdict for 
a record in our own hearts as well as the community at large, 

I can only remember a Russian peasant who told me his grandfather 
warned him If you nde too good a horse you will not take the 
straight road to town 

It will always come back to me in the blur of that hokku The heart of 
a woman of thirty is like the red ball of the sun seen through a mist. 

Or I will remember the witchery in the eyes of a girl at a bam dance 
one winter night in Illmois saying 

Put off the wedding five times and nobody comes to it 


BABY VAMPS 

Baby vamps, is it harder work than it used to be? 

Are the new soda parlors worse than the old fame saloons? 
Baby vamps, do you have jobs in the day time 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


251 


or IS this all you do^ 

do you come out only at night? 

In the winter at the skating rinks, in the summer at the roller coaster 
parks, 

Wherever figure eights are carved, by skates m winter, by roller coasters 
in summer, 

Wherever the whirligigs are going and chicken Spanish and hot dog are 
sold. 

There you come, giggling baby vamp, there you come with your blue 
baby eyes, saying 

Take me along 


VAUDEVILLE DANCER 

Elsie Flimmerwon, you got a job now with a jazz outfit in vaudeville 

The houses go wild when you finish the act shimmying a fast shimmy 
to The Livery Stable Blues 

It IS long ago, Elsie Flimmerwon, I saw your mother over a washtub m 
a grape arbor when your father came with the locomotor ataxia shuffle 

It IS long ago, Elsie, and now they spell your name with an electric sign 

Then you were a little thing in checked gingham and your mother wiped 
your nose and said You little fool, keep off the streets 

Now you are a big girl at last and streetfuls of people read your name 
and a line of people shaped like a letter S stand at the box oflfice hoping 
to see you shimmy. 


BALLOON FACES 

The balloons hang on wires in the Mangold Gardens 
They spot their >ellow and gold, they juggle their blue and red, they 
float their faces on the face of the sky 
Balloon-face eaters sit by hundreds reading the eat cards, asking, '*What 


252 


  


shall we eat?”— and the waiters, “Have you ordered?” they are sixty 
balloon faces sifting white over the tuxedoes 

Poets, lawyers, ad men, mason contractors, smart-alecks discussing “edu- 
cated jackasses,” here they put crabs into their balloon faces 

Here sit the heavy balloon-face women lifting crimson lobsters into their 
crimson faces, lobsters out of Sargossa sea-bottoms 

Here sits a man cross-examining a woman, “Where were you last night? 
What do you do with all your money? Who’s buying your shoes now, 
anyhow?” 

So they sit eating whitefish, two balloon faces swept on God’s night wind 

And all the time the balloon spots on the wires, a little mile of festoons, 
they play their own silence play of film yellow and film gold, bubble 
blue and bubble red 

The wind crosses the town, the wind from the west side comes to the 
banks of mangolds boxed m the Marigold Gardens 

Night moths fly and fix their feet in the leaves and eat and are seen b> 
the eaters 

The jazz outfit sweats and the drums and the saxophones reach for the 
ears of the eaters 

The chorus brought from Broadway works at the fun and the slouch of 
their shoulders, the kick of their ankles, reach for the eyes of the 
eaters 

These girls from Kokomo and Peoria, these hungry girls, since they are 
paid-for, let us look on and listen, let us get their number 

Why do I go again to the balloons on the wires, something for nothing, 
kin women of the half-moon, dream women? 

And the half-moon swinging on the wind crossing the town— these two, 
the half-moon and the wind— this will be about all, this will be 
about all 

Eaters, go to it, your mazuma pays for it all, it’s a knockout, a classy 
knockout— and payday always comes 

The moths in the mangolds will do for me, the half-moon, the wishing 
wind and the little mile of balloon spots on wires— this will be about 
all, this will be about all 


HAZE 


Keep a red heart of memories 

Under the great gray ram sheds of the sky, 

Under the open sun and the yellow gloaming embers 
Remember all paydays of lilacs and songbirds, 

All starlights of cool memories on storm paths 

Out of this prairie rise the faces of dead men 
They speak to me I can not tell you what they say 

Other faces rise on the prairie 

They are the unborn The future 

Yesterday and tomorrow cross and mix on the skyline 
The two are lost in a purple haze One forgets One waits 

In the yellow dust of sunsets, in the meadows of vermilion eight o'clock 
June nights the dead men and the unborn children speak to 
me I can not tell you what they say you listen and you 
know 

I don't care who you are, man 

I know a woman is looking for you 

and her soul is a com-tassel kissing a south-west wind. 

(The farm-boy whose face is the color of brick-dust, is calling the cows, 
he will form the letter X with crossed streams of milk from the teats, 
he will beat a tattoo on the bottom of a tin pail with X's of milk ) 

I don't care who you are, man 
I know sons and daughters looking for you 


2S4 


  


And they are gray dust working toward star paths 

And you see them from a garret window when you laugh 

At your luck and murmur, “I don’t care ” 

I don’t care who you are, woman 

I know a man is looking for you 

And his soul is a south-west wind kissing a corn-tassel 

(The kitchen girl on the farm is throwing oats to the chickens and the 
bufE of their feathers says hello to the sunset’s late maroon ) 

I don’t care who you are, woman 

I know sons and daughters looking for >ou 

And they are next year’s wheat or the year after hidden in the dark and 
loam 

My love is a yellow hammer spinning circles in Ohio, Indiana My love 
IS a redbird shooting flights in straight lines m Kentucky and Ten- 
nessee My love is an early robin flaming an ember of copper on her 
shoulders in March and April My love is a graybird living in the 
eaves of a Michigan house all winter Why is my love always a cry- 
ing thing of wings? 

On the Indiana dunes, in the Mississippi marshes, I have asked Is it only 
a fishbone on the beach? 

Is it only a dog’s }aw or a horse’s skull whitening m the sun? Is the red 
heart of man only ashes? Is the flame of it all a white light switched 
off and the power-house wires cut? 

Why do the praine roses answer every summer? Why do the changing 
repeating rams come back out of the salt sea wind-blown? Why do 
the stars keep their tracb? Why do the cradles of the sky rock new 
babies? 


CADENZA 
The knees 

of this proud woman 
are bone 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


255 

The elbows 
of this proud woman 
are bone 

The summer-white stars 
and the winter-white stars 
never stop circling 
around this proud woman 

The bones 
of this proud woman 
answer the vibrations 
of the stars 

In summer 

the stars speak deep thoughts 
In the winter 

the stars repeat summer speeches. 

The knees 

of this proud woman 
know these thoughts 
and know these speeches 
of the summer and winter stars 


MEMORANDA 

This handful of grass, brown, says little This quarter-mile field of it, 
waving seeds ripening in the sun, is a lake of luminous firefly 
lavender 

Prairie roses, two of them, climb down the sides of a road ditch In the 
clear pool they find their faces along stiff knives of grass, and cat-tails 
who speak and keep thoughts in beaver brown 

These gardens empty, these fields only flower ghosts, these yards with 
faces gone, leaves speaking as feet and skirts m slow dances to slow 
winds, I turn my head and say good-by to no one who hears, I pro- 
nounce a useless good-by. 


2^6 


  


POTOMAC TOWN IN FEBRUARY 

The bridge says Come across, try me, see how good I am 
The big rock in the river says Look at me, leam how to stand up 
The white water says I go on, around, under, over, I go on 
A kneeling, scraggly pine says I am here yet, they nearly got me last year 
A sliver of moon slides by on a high wind calling I know why. I’ll see 
you tomorrow. I’ll tell you everything tomorrow 


BUFFALO DUSK 


The buffaloes are gone 

And those who saw the buffaloes are gone 

Those who saw the buffaloes by thousands and how they pawed the 
prame sod into dust with their hoofs, their great heads down pawing 
on in a great pageant of dusk. 

Those who saw the buffaloes are gone 
And the buffaloes are gone 


CORN HUT TALK 

Write your wishes 
on the door 
and come in 

Stand outside 

m the pools of the harvest moon 
Bnng in 

the handshake of the pumpkins 

There’s a wish 
for every hazel nut? 

There’s a hope 
for every com shock? 

There’s a kiss 

for every clumsy climbing shadow? 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


257 


Clover and the bumblebees once, 
high winds and November ram now 

Buy shoes 

for rough weather m November 
Buy shirts 

to sleep outdoors when May comes 
Buy me 

something useless to remember you by 
Send me 

a sumach leaf from an Illinois hill 

In the faces marching in the firelog flickers, 

In the fire music of wood singing to winter. 

Make my face march through the purple and ashes 
Make me one of the fire singers to winter 


BRANCHES 

The dancing girls here after a long night of it 

The long beautiful night of the wind and ram in April, 

The long night hanging down from the droopmg branches of the top of 
a birch tree. 

Swinging, swaying, to the wind for a partner, to the ram for a partner 

What IS the humming, swishing thmg they smg in the morning now? 

The ram, the wind, the swishing whispers of the long slim curve so little 
and so dark on the western morning sky these dancing girls 
here on an Apnl early morning 

They have had a long cool beautiful night of it with their partners learn- 
ing this year’s song of April 


RUSTY CRIMSON 
(Christmas Day, 1917) 

The five o’clock praine sunset is a strong man going to sleep after a long 
day in a cornfield 

The red dust of a rusty crimson is fixed with two fingers of lavender 
A hook of smoke, a woman’s nose m charcoal and notliing 



258 


  


The timberlme turns m a cover of purple. A grain elevator humps a 
shoulder One steel star whisks out a pointed fire Moonlight comes 
on the stubble 

“Jesus in an Illinois bam early this morning, the baby Jesus m 
flannels 


LETTER S 

The river is gold under a sunset of Illinois 
It IS a molten gold someone pours and changes 
A woman mixing a wedding cake of butter and eggs 
Knows what the sunset is pounng on the nver here. 
The nver twists in a letter S 

A gold S now speaks to the Illinois sky 


WEEDS 

From the time of the early radishes 
To the time of the standing com 
Sleepy Henry Hackerman hoes 

There are laws in the village against weeds 
The law says a weed is wrong and shall be killed 
The weeds say life is a white and lovely thing 
And the weeds come on and on in irrepressible regiments 
Sleepy Henry Hackerman hoes, and the village law uttering a ban on 
weeds is unchangeable law 


NEW FARM TRACTOR 

Snub nose, the guts of twenty mules are in your cylinders and transmission 

The rear axles hold the kick of twenty Missoun jackasses 

It IS in the records of the patent office and the ads there is twenty horse- 
power pull here 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


359 


The farm boy says hello to you instead of twenty mules— he sings to you 
instead of ten span of mules 

A bucket of oil and a can of grease is your hay and oats 

Ram proof and fool proof they stable you anywhere in the fields with the 
stars for a roof 

I carve a team of long ear mules on the steenng wheel— it’s good-by now 
to leather reins and the songs of the old mule skinnen 


PODS 

Pea pods cling to stems 
Neponset, the village, 

Clings to the Burlington railway main line 
Terrible midnight hmiteds roar through 
Hauling sleepers to the Rockies and Sierras 
The earth is slightly shaken 
And Neponset trembles slightly in its sleep 


HARVEST SUNSET 

Red gold of pools, 

Sunset furrows six o’clock. 

And the farmer done m the fields 

And the cows m the bams with bulging udders. 

Take the cows and the farmer. 

Take the bams and bulging udders 
Leave the red gold of pools 
And sunset furrows six o’clock 
The farmer’s wife is singing 
The farmer’s boy is whistling 
I wash my hands in red gold of pools 


26 o 


  


NIGHT'S NOTHINGS AGAIN 

Who knows what I know 
when I have asked the night questions 
and the night has answered nothing 
only the old answers^ 

Who picked a crimson cryptogram, 

the tail light of a motor car turning a corner, 

or the midnight sign of a chile con came place, 

or a man out of the ashes of false dawn muttering ''hot-dog" to the night 
watchmen 

Is there a spieler who has spoken the word or taken the number of night's 
nothings^ am I the spieler^ or you^ 

Is there a tired head 

the night has not fed and rested 

and kept on its neck and shoulders^ 

Is there a wish 
Of man to woman 
and woman to man 
the night has not written 
and signed its name under^ 

Does the night forget 
as a woman forgets? 
and remember 
as a woman remembers? 

Who gave the night 
this head of hair, 
this gypsy head 
calling Come-on? 


Who gave the night anything at all 
and asked the night questions 
and was laughed at? 



SMOKE AND STEEL 


261 


Who asked the night 

for a long soft kiss 

and lost the half-way lips? 

who picked a red lamp in a mist? 

Who saw the night 
fold its Mona Lisa hands 
and sit half-smilmg, half-sad, 
nothing at all, 
and everything, 
all the world? 

Who saw the night 

let down its hair 

and shake its bare shoulders 

and blow out the candles of the moon, 

whispering, snickering, 

cutting off the snicker and sobbing . , 
out of pillow-wet kisses and tears? 

Is the night woven of anything else 
than the secret wishes of women, 
the stretched empty arms of women? 
the hair of women with stars and roses? 

I asked the night these questions 
I heard the night asking me these questions 

I saw the night 
put these whispered nothings 
across the city dust and stones, 
across a single yellow sunflower, 
one stalk strong as a woman's wnst. 

And the play of a light rain, 

the ]ig-time folly of a light ram, 

the creepers of a drizzle on the sidewalks 

for the policemen and the railroad men, 

for the home-goers and the homeless, 

silver fans and funnels on the asphalt, 

the many feet of a fog mist that crept away, 


262 


  


I saw the night 

put these nothings across 

and the night wind came saying Come-on' 

and the curve of sky swept off white clouds 

and swept on white stars over Battery to Bronx, 

scooped a sea of stars over Albany, Dobbs Ferry, Cape Horn, Constanti- 
nople 

I saw the night’s mouth and lips 
strange as a face next to mine on a pillow 
and now I know as I knew always 
the night is a lover of mine 
I know the night is everything 

I know the night is all the world. 

I have seen gold lamps in a lagoon 
play sleep and murmur 
with never an eyelash, 
never a glint of an eyelid, 
quivering in the water-shadows 

A taxi whizzes by, an owl car clutters, passengers yawn reading street signs, 
a bum on a park bench shifts, another bum keeps his majesty of stone 
stillness, the forty-foot split rocks of Central Park sleep the sleep of 
stone whalebacks, the cornices of the Metropolitan Art mutter their 
own nothings to the men with rolled-up collars on the top of a bus 
Breaths of the sea salt Atlantic, breaths of two rivers, and a heave of haw- 
sers and smokestacks, the swish of multiplied sloops and war dogs, 
the hesitant hoo-hoo of coal boats among these I listen to Night 
calling 

I give you what money can never buy all other lovers change all others 
go away and come back and go away again 
I am the one you slept with last night 
I am the one you sleep with tonight and 
tomorrow night 

I am the one whose passion kisses 
keep your head wondenng 
and your lips aching 
to sing one song 
never sung before 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


263 


at night's gypsy head 
calling Come-on 

These hands that slid to my neck and held me, 

these fingers that told a story, 

this gypsy head of hair calling Come-on 

can anyone else come along now 

and put across night's nothings agam^ 

I have wanted kisses my heart stuttered at asking, 

I have pounded at useless doors and called my people fools 
I have staggered alone m a winter dark making mumble songs 
to the sting of a blizzard that clutched and swore 

It was the night in my blood 
open dreaming night, 
night of tireless sheet-steel blue 
The hands of God washing something, 
feet of God walking somewhere. 



PANELS 

The west window is a panel of marching onions 
Five new lilacs nod to the wind and fence boards 
The ram dry fence boards, the stained knot holes, 
heliograph a peace 

(How long ago the knee dnfts here and a blizzard 
howling at the knot holes, 
whistling winter war drums^) 


264 


  


DAN 

Early May, after cold ram the sun bafHmg cold wind 
Insh setter pup finds a comer near the cellar door, 
all sun and no wind. 

Cuddling there he crosses forepaws and lays his skull 
Sideways on this pillow, dozing in a half-sleep. 

Browns of hazel nut, mahogany, rosewood, played off 
against each other on his paws 
and head 


WHIFFLETREE 


Give me your anathema 
Speak new damnations on my head 
The evening mist in the hills is soft 
Tlie boulders on the road say communion 

The farm dogs look out of their eyes and keep thoughts from the com 
cnbs 

Dirt of the reeling earth holds horseshoes 
The rings in the whifHetree count their secrets 
Come on, you 


MASCOTS 

I WILL keep you and bnng hands to hold you against a great hunger 
I will run a spear in you for a great gladness to die with 
I will stab you between the nbs of the left side with a great love worth 
remembering 


THE SKYSCRAPER LOVES NIGHT 

One by one lights of a skyscraper fling their checkenng cross work on the 
velvet gown of night 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


265 


I believe the skyscraper loves night as a woman and brings her playthings 
she asks for, brings her a velvet gown, 

And loves the white of her shoulders hidden under the dark feel of it all 

The masonry of steel looks to the night for somebody it loves, 

He is a little dizzy and almost dances waiting . dark 


NEVER BORN 

The time has gone by 

The child is dead 

The child was never even born 

Why go on^ Why so much as begin? 

How can we turn the clock back now 

And not laugh at each other 

As ashes laugh at ashes? 


THIN STRIPS 

In a jeweler’s shop I saw a man beating 
out thin sheets of gold I heard a woman 
laugh many years ago 

Under a peach tree I saw petals scattered 
torn strips of a bride’s dress I heard 
a woman laugh many years ago. 


FIVE CENT BALLOONS 

Pietro has twenty red and blue balloons on a string 
They flutter and dance pulling Pietro’s arm. 

A nickel apiece is what they sell for 

Wishing children tag Pietro’s heels 

He sells out and goes the streets alone. 




266 


  


MY PEOPLE 

My people are gray, 

pigeon gray, dawn gray, storm gray 
I call them beautiful, 

and I wonder where they are going 


SWIRL 

A SWIRL in the air where your head was once, here 
You walked under this tree, spoke to a moon for me 
I might almost stand here and believe you alive 


WISTFUL 

Wishes left on your lips 
The mark of their wings 
Regrets fly kites in your eyes 


BASKET 

Speak, sir, and be wise 
Speak choosing your words, sir, 

like an old woman over a bushel 
of apples 


FIRE PAGES 

I WILL read ashes for you, if you ask me 
I will look m the fire and tell you from the gray lashes 
And out of the red and black tongues and stnpes, 

I will tell how fire comes 
And how fire runs far as the sea 


SMOKE AND STEEL 


267 


FINISH 

Death comes once, let it be easy 
Ring one bell for me once, let it go at that 
Or ring no bell at all, better yet 

Sing one song if I die 

Sing John Brown’s Body or Shout All Over God’s Heaven 
Or sing nothing at all, better yet 

Death comes once, let it be easy 


FOR YOU 

The peace of great doors be for you 
Wait at the knobs, at the panel oblongs. 
Wait for the great hinges 

The peace of great churches be for you, 
Where the players of loft pipe organs 
Practice old lovely fragments, alone 

The peace of great books be for you. 

Stains of pressed clover leaves on pages. 
Bleach of the light of years held in leather. 

The peace of great prairies be for you 
Listen among windplayers in cornfields. 

The wind learning over its oldest music. 

The peace of great seas be for you 
Wait on a hook of land, a rock footing 
For you, wait m the salt wash 

The peace of great mountains be for you, 

The sleep and the eyesight of eagles. 

Sheet mist shadows and the long look across. 


268 


  


The peace of great hearts be for you, 

Valves of the blood of the sun, 

Pumps of the strongest wants we cry 

The peace of great silhouettes be for you, 
Shadow dancers alive in your blood now. 

Alive and crying, 'Tet us out, let us out 

The peace of great changes be for you 
Whisper, Oh beginners m the hills 
Tumble, Oh cubs— tomorrow belongs to you 

The peace of great loves be for you 

Ram, soak these roots, wind, shatter the dry rot 

Bars of sunlight, gnps of the earth, hug these 

The peace of great ghosts be for you. 

Phantoms of night-gray eyes, ready to go 
To the fog-star dumps, to the fire-white doors 

Yes, the peace of great phantoms be for you, 
Phantom iron men, mothers of bronze. 

Keepers of the lean clean breeds 


SLABS 

OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 



TO 

HELGA 



slabs of tlie STHnbiiiriif IJVesf 


THE WINDY CITY 
1 

The lean hands of wagon men 
put out pointing fingers here, 
picked this crossway, put it on a map, 
set up their sawbucks, fixed their shotguns, 
found a hitching place for the pony express, 
made a hitching place for the iron horse, 
the one-eyed horse with the fire-spit head, 
found a homelike spot and said, '‘Make a home,'" 
saw this corner with a mesh of rails, shuttling 
people, shunting cars, shaping the junk of 
the earth to a new city 

The hands of men took hold and tugged 
And the breaths of men went into the junk 
And the junk stood up into skyscrapers and asked 
Who am P Am I a city^ And if I am what is my name^ 
And once while the time whistles blew and blew again 
The men answered Long ago we gave you a name, 

Long ago we laughed and said You? Your name is Chicago, 

Early the red men gave a name to a river, 
the place of the skunk, 
the river of the wild onion smell, 

Shee-caw-go 

Out of the payday songs of steam shovels. 

Out of the wages of structural iron nvets. 

The living lighted skyscrapers tell it now as a name, 

271 



2J2 


  


Tell it across miles of sea blue water, gray blue land 
I am Chicago, I am a name given out by the breaths of working men, 
laughing men, a child, a belonging 

So between the Great Lakes, 

The Grand De Tour, and the Grand Prairie, 

The living lighted skyscrapers stand, 

Spotting the blue dusk with checkers of yellow, 
streamers of smoke and silver, 
parallelograms of night-gray watchmen, 

Singing a soft moaning song I am a child, a belonging 

2 

How should the wind songs of a windy city goP 
Singing in a high wind the dirty chatter gets blown 
away on the wind— the clean shovel, 
the clean pickax, 
lasts 

It is easy for a child to get breakfast and pack off 
to school with a pair of roller skates, 
buns for lunch, and a geography 
Riding through a tunnel under a river running backward, 
to school to listen how the Pottawatomies 
and the Blackhawks . ran on moccasins 
between Kaskaskia, Peona, Kankakee, and Chicago 

It IS easy to sit listening to a boy babbling 
of the Pottawatomie moccasins m Illinois, 
how now the roofs and smokestacks cover miles 
where the deerfoot left its writing 
and the foxpaw put its initials 
m the snow . . for the early moccasins to read 

It is easy for the respectable taxpayers to sit m the 
streetcars and read the papers, faces of burglars, 
the pnson escapes, the hunger strikes, the cost of 
living, the pnce of dying, the shop gate battles of 
strikers and stnkebreakers, the stnkers killing 



SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 




scabs and the police killing strikers — the strongest, 
the strongest, always the strongest 

It is easy to listen to the haberdasher customers hand each other their 
easy chatter— -it is easy to die 
alive— to register a living thumbprint and be dead 
from the neck up 

And there are sidewalks polished with the footfalls of 
undertakers' stiflEs, greased mannikins, wearing up-to- 
the-minute sox, lifting heels across doorsills, 
shoving their faces ahead of them— dead from the 
neck up— proud of their sox— their sox are the last 
word— dead from the neck up— it is easy 

3 

Lash yourself to the bastion of a bridge 

and listen while the black cataracts of people go by, 
baggage, bundles, balloons, 
listen while they jazz the classics 

''Since when did you kiss yourself in 
And who do you think you are? 

Come across, kick in, loosen up 
Where do you get that chatter?" 

"Beat up the short-change artists 
They never did nothin' for you 
How do you get that way? 

Tell me and I'll tell the world 
I'll say so. I'll say it is " 

"You're trying to crab my act 
You poor fish, you mackerel, 

You ain't got the sense God 
Gave an oyster— it's raining— 

What you want is an umbrella " 

"Hush baby— 

I don't know a thing 
I don't know a thing 
Hush baby " 


274 


  


“Hush baby, 

It ain’t how old you are, 

It’s how old you look 
It ain’t what you got, 

It’s what you can get away with ” 

“Bnng home the bacon 
Put it over, shoot it across 
Send ’em to the cleaners. 

What we want is results, re-sults 
And damn the consequences 
Sh . sh 
You can fix anything 
If you got the nght fixers ” 

“Kid each other, you cheap skates 

Tell each other you’re all to the mustard— 

You’re the gravy ” 

“Tell ’em, honey 
Ain’t it the truth, sweetheart? 

Watch your step 
You said it 
You said a mouthful 
We’re all a lot of damn fourflushers ” 

“Hush baby! 

Shoot it. 

Shoot it all! 

Coo coo, coo coo”— 

This is one song of Chicago 

4 

It IS easy to come here a stranger and show the whole works, wnte a 
book, fix it all up— it is easy to come and go away a muddle-headed 
pig, a bum and a bag of wind 

Go to it and remember this city fished from its 
depths a text “independent as a hog on ice ” 



SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


275 


Venice is a dream of soft waters, Vienna and Bagdad recollections of dark 
spears and wild turbans, Pans is a thought in Monet gray on scab- 
bards, fabrics, fagades, London is a fact in a fog filled with the moan- 
ing of transatlantic whistles, Berlin sits amid white scrubbed quad- 
rangles and torn arithmetics and testaments, Moscow brandishes a flag 
and repeats a dance figure of a man who walks like a bear, 

Chicago fished from its depths a text Independent 
as a hog on ice 

5 

Forgive us if the monotonous houses go mile on mile 
Along monotonous streets out to the praines— 

If the faces of the houses mumble hard words 
At the streets— and the street voices only say 
''Dust and a bitter wind shall come 
Forgive us if the lumber porches and doorsteps 
Snarl at each other— 

And the brick chimneys cough in a close-up of 
Each other's faces— 

And the ramshackle stairways watch each other 
As thieves watch— 

And dooryard lilacs near a malleable iron works 

Long ago languished 

In a short whispering purple 

And if the alley ash cans 
Tell the garbage-wagon drivers 
The children play the alley is Heaven 
And the streets of Heaven shine 
With a grand dazzle of stones of gold 
And there are no policemen m Heaven- 
Let the rag-tags have it their way 

And if the geraniums 

In the tin cans of the window sills 

Ask questions not worth answering— 

And if a boy and a girl hunt the sun 
With a sieve for sifting smoke— 

Let it pass— let the answer be— 

"Dust and a bitter wind shall come 


276 


  


Forgive us if the ]azz timebeats 
Of these clumsy mass shadows 
Moan m saxophone undertones. 

And the footsteps of the jungle, 

The fang cry, the rip claw hiss, 

The sneak-up and the still watch. 

The slant of the slit eyes waiting— 

If these bother respectable people 

with the right crimp in their napkins 
reading breakfast menu cards— 
forgive us— let it pass— let be 

If cripples sit on their stumps 
And joke with the newsies bawling, 

"'Many lives lost* many lives lost* 

Ter-ri-ble ac-ci-dent* many lives lost*"'— 

If again twelve men let a woman go, 

"'He done me wrong, I shot him”— 

Or the blood of a child's head 
Spatters on the hub of a motor truck— 

Or a 44-gat cracks and lets the skylights 
Into one more bank messenger— 

Or if boys steal coal m a railroad yard 
And run with humped gunnysacks 
While a bull picks off one of the kids 
And the kid wriggles with an ear m cinders 
And a mother comes to carry home 
A bundle, a limp bundle, 

To have his face washed, for the last time. 
Forgive us if it happens— and happens again— 
And happens again 

Forgive the jazz bmebeat 
of clumsy mass shadows, 
footsteps of the jungle, 
the fang cry, the np claw hiss, 
the slant of the slit eyes waiting. 

Forgive us if we work so hard 
And the muscles bunch clumsy on us 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


277 


And we never know why we work so hard— 

If the big houses with little families 

And the little houses with big families 

Sneer at each other's bars of misunderstanding, 

Pity us when we shackle and kill each other 
And believe at first we understand 
And later say we wonder why 

Take home the monotonous patter 

Of the elevated railroad guard in the rush hours 

'Watch your step Watch your step Watch your step 

Or write on a pocket pad what a pauper said 

To a patch of purple asters at a whitewashed wall 

'‘Let every man be his own Jesus— that's enough " 

6 

The wheelbarrows grm, the shovels and the mortar 
hoist an exploit 

The stone shanks of the Monadnock, the Transportation, 
the People's Gas Building, stand up and scrape 
at the sky 

The wheelbarrows sing, the bevels and the blueprints 
whisper 

The library building named after Crerar, naked 
as a stock farm silo, light as a single eagle 
feather, stripped like an airplane propeller, 
takes a path up 

Two cool new nvets say, ''Maybe it is morning," 

"God knows " 

Put the city up, tear the city down, 
put it up again, let us find a city 
Let us remember the little violet-eyed 
man who gave all, praying, "Dig and 
dream, dream and hammer, till your 
city comes " 

Every day the people sleep and the city dies, 
every day the people shake loose, awake and 
build the city again 


278 


  


The city is a tool chest opened every day, 
a time clock punched every morning, 
a shop door, bunkers and overalls 
counting every day 

The city is a balloon and a bubble plaything 
shot to the sky every evening, whistled in 
a ragtime jig down the sunset 

The city is made, forgotten, and made again, 
trucks hauling it away haul it back 
steered by drivers whistling ragtime 
against the sunsets 

Every day the people get up and carry the city, 
carry the bunkers and balloons of the city, 
lift it and put it down 

will die as many times 
as you make me over again, 
says the city to the people, 

I am the woman, the home, the family, 

I get breakfast and pay the rent, 

I telephone the doctor, the milkman, the undertaker, 
I fix the streets 

for your first and your last ride— 

Come clean with me, come clean or dirty, 

I am stone and steel of your sleeping numbers, 

I remember all you forget 
I will die as many times 
as you make me over again 

Under the foundations, 

Over the roofs. 

The bevels and the blueprints talk it over 
The wind of the lake shore waits and wanders 
The heave of the shore wind hunches the sand piles 
The winkers of the morning stars count out cities 
And forget the numbers 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


279 


7 

At the white clock-tower 

lighted m night purples 

over the boulevard link bridge 

only the blind get by without acknowledgments 

The passers-by, factory punch-clock numbers, 
hotel girls out for the air, teameoes, 
coal passers, taxi drivers, window washers, 
paperhangers, floorwalkers, bill collectors, 
burglar alarm salesmen, massage students, 
manicure girls, chiropodists, bath rubbers, 
booze runners, hat cleaners, armhole basters, 
delicatessen clerks, shovel stiffs, work plugs— 

They all pass over the bridge, they all look up 
at the white clock-tower 
lighted in night purples 
over the boulevard link bridge— 

And sometimes one says, 'Well, we hand it to 'em 

Mention proud things, catalogue them 
The jack-knife bridge opening, the ore boats, 
the wheat barges passing through 
Three overland trams arriving the same hour, 
one from Memphis and the cotton belt, 
one from Omaha and the com belt, 
one from Duluth, the lumberjack and the iron range 
Mention a carload of shorthorns taken off the valleys of Wyoming last 
week, arriving yesterday, knocked m the head, stripped, quartered, 
hung in ice boxes today, mention the daily melodrama of this hum 
drum, rhythms of heads, hides, heels, hoofs hung up 

8 

It is wisdom to think the people are the city 
It is wisdom to think the city would fall to pieces 
and die and be dust in the wind 

If the people of the city all move away and leave no people at all to watch 
and keep the city 


28 o 


  


It IS Wisdom to think no city stood here at all until the working men, the 
laughing men, came 

It IS wisdom to think tomorrow new working men, new laughing men, may 
come and put up a new city— 

Living lighted skyscrapers and a night lingo of lanterns testify tomorrow 
shall have its own say>so 


9 

Night gathers itself into a ball of dark yarn 
Night loosens the ball and it spreads 
The lookouts from the shores of Lake Michigan 
find night follows day, and ping^ ping^ across 
sheet gray the boat lights put their signals 
Night lets the daik yarn unravel. Night speaks and the yarns change to 
fog and blue strands 

The lookouts turn to the city 
The canyons swarm with red sand lights 
of the sunset 

The atoms drop and sift, blues cross over, 
yellows plunge 

Mixed light shafts stack their bayonets, 
pledge with crossed handles 
So, when the canyons swarm, it is then the 
lookouts speak 

Of the high spots over a street . . . mountain language 
Of skyscrapers in dusk, the Railway Exchange, 

The People's Gas, the Monadnock, the Transportation, 

Gone to the gloaming 

The nver turns m a half circle 
The Goose Island bridges curve 
over the river curve 
Then the nver panorama 
performs for the bndge, 
dots . lights . • dots . • . lights, 

sixes and sevens of dots and lights, 
a lingo of lanterns and searchlights, 
circling sprays of gray and yellow. 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


281 


10 

A man came as a witness saying 
“I listened to the Great Lalces 
And I listened to the Grand Prairie, 

And they had little to say to each other, 

A whisper or so in a thousand years 
‘Some of the cities are big,’ said one 
‘And some not so big,’ said another 
‘And sometimes the cities are all gone,’ 

Said a black knob bluff to a light green sea ” 

Winds of the Windy City, come out of the prairie, 
all the way from Medicine Hat 
Come out of the inland sea blue water, come where 
they nickname a city for you 

Corn wind in the fall, come off the black lands, 
come off the whisper of the silk hangers, 
the lap of the flat spear leaves 

Blue water wind in summer, come off the blue miles 
of lake, carry your inland sea blue fingers, 
carry us cool, carry your blue to our homes 

White spnng winds, come off the bag wool clouds, 
come off the running melted snow, come white 
as the arms of snow-bom children 

Gray fighting winter winds, come along on the tear- 
ing blizzard tails, the snouts of the hungry 
hunting storms, come fighting pay in winter 

Winds of the Windy City, 

Winds of com and sea blue, 

Spnng wind white and fighting winter gray. 

Come home here— they nickname a city for you 


282 


  


The wind of the lake shore waits and wanders 
The heave of the shore wind hunches the sand piles. 
The winkers of the morning stars count out cities 
And forget the numbers 


WASHINGTON MONUMENT BY NIGHT 
1 

The stone goes straight 
A lean swimmer div« into night sky, 

Into half-moon mist. 


2 

Two trees are coal black. 

This IS a great white ghost between 

It IS cool to look at 

Strong men, strong women, come here 

3 

Eight years is a long time 
To be fighting all the time 

4 

The republic is a dream 

Nothing happens unless first a dream 

5 

The wind bit hard at Valley Forge one Chnstmas 
Soldiers tied rags on their feet 
Red footprints wrote on the snow . . . 
and stone shoots into stars here 
into half-moon mist tonight 

6 

Tongues wrangled dark at a man. 

He buttoned his overcoat and stood alone 
In a snowstorm, red hollybemes, thoughts, 
he stood alone. 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


3S5 


7 

Women said He is lonely 

fighting fighting . . . eight years 

8 

The name of an iron man goes over the world 
It takes a long time to forget an iron man. 

9 


AND SO TODAY 

Anb so today— they lay him away— 
the boy nobody knows the name of— 
the buck private— the unknown soldier— 
the doughboy who dug under and died 
when they told him to— that’s him 

Down Pennsylvania Avenue today the nders go, 
men and boys nding horses, roses in their teeth, 
stems of roses, rose leaf stalks, rose dark leaves— 
the line of the green ends in a red rose flash 

Skeleton men and boys riding skeleton horses, 

the nb bones shine, the nb bones curve, 

shine with savage, elegant curves— 

a jawbone runs with a long white slant, 

a skull dome runs with a long white arch, 

bone tnangles click and rattle, 

elbows, ankles, white line slants— 

shining in the sun, past the White House, 

past the Treasury Building, Army and Navy Buildings, 

on to the mystic white Capitol Dome— 

so they go down Pennsylvania Avenue today, 

skeleton men and boys nding skeleton horses, 

stems of roses in their teeth. 


284 


  


rose dark leaves at their white jaw slants— 
and a horse laugh question nickers and whinnies, 
moans with a whistle out of horse head teeth 
why^ who^ where^ 

('The big fish— eat the little fish— 

the little fish— eat the shnmps— 

and the shnmps— eat mud' — 

said a cadaverous man— with a black umbrella- 

spotted with white polka dots— with a missing 

ear— with a missing foot and arms— 

with a missing sheath of muscles 

singing to the silver sashes of the sun ) 

And so today— they lay him away— 
the boy nobody knows the name of— 
the buck private— the unknown soldier— 
the doughboy who dug under and died 
when they told him to— that's him 

If he picked himself and said, '1 am ready to die," 
if he gave his name and said, "My country, take me," 
then the baskets of roses today are for the Boy, 
the flowers, the songs, the steamboat whistles, 
the proclamations of the honorable orators, 
they are all for the Boy— that's him 

If the government of the Republic picked him saying, 

"You are wanted, your country takes you"— 
if the Republic put a stethoscope to his heart 
and looked at his teeth and tested his eyes and said, 

"You are a citizen of the Republic and a sound animal 
in all parts and functions— the Republic takes you"— 
then today the baskets of flowers are all for the Republic, 
the roses, the songs, the steamboat whistles, 
the proclamations of the honomble orators— 
they are all for the Republic 

And so today— they lay him away— 

and an understanding goes— his long sleep shall be 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


285 


under arms and arches near the Capitol Dome— 

there is an authorization— he shall have tomb companions— 

the martyred presidents of the Republic— 

the buck private— the unknown soldier— thafs him 

The man who was war commander of the armies of the Republic 
rides down Pennsylvania Avenue— 

The man who is peace commander of the armies of the Republic 

rides down Pennsylvania Avenue— 

for the sake of the Boy, for the sake of the Republic 

(And the hoofs of tlie skeleton horses 

all drum soft on the asphalt footing— 

so soft IS the drumming, so soft the roll call 

of the grinning sergeants calling the roll call— 

so soft is it all— a camera man murmurs, '^Moonshine ”) 

Look— who salutes the cofEn— 

lays a wreath of remembrance 

on the box where a buck pnvate 

sleeps a clean dry sleep at last- 

look— it is the highest ranking general 

of the ofhcers of the armies of the Republic 

(Among pigeon comers of the Congressional Library— they file docu- 
ments quietly, casually, all m a day's work- this human document, 
the buck private nobody knows the name of— they file away in granite 
and steel— wrth music and roses, salutes, proclamations of the hon- 
orable orators ) 

Across the country, between two ocean shore lines, 

where cities cling to rail and water routes, 

there people and horses stop m their foot tracks, 

cars and wagons stop in their wheel tracks— 

faces at street crossings shine with a silence 

of eggs laid m a row on a pantry shelf— 

among the ways and paths of the flow of the Repubhc 

faces come to a standstill, sixty clockticks count— 

in the name of the Boy, in the name of the Republic. 


286 


  


(A million faces a thousand miles from Pennsylvania Avenue stay 
frozen with a look, a clocktick, a moment-— skeleton riders on 
skeleton horses— the nickering high horse laugh, the whinny and the 
howl up Pennsylvania Avenue who^ why? where?) 

(So people far from the asphalt footing of Pennsylvania Avenue 
look, wonder, mumble— the riding white-]aw phantoms ride hi-eeee, 
hi-eeee, hpyi, hi-yi, hi-eeee— the proclamations of the honorable ora- 
tors mix with the top-sergeants whistling the roll call ) 

If when the clockticks counted sixty, 

when the heartbeats of the Republic 

came to a stop for a minute, 

if the Boy had happened to sit up, 

happening to sit up as Lazarus sat up, in the story, 

then the first shivering language to drip off his mouth 

might have come as, 'Thank God,'" or "Am I dreaming?"' 

or "What the hell" or "When do we eat?" 

or "Kill 'em, kill 'em, the 

or "Was that . a rat ran over my face?" 

or "For Christ's sake, gimme water, gimme water," 

or "Blub blub, bloo bloo 

or any bubbles of shell-shock gibberish 

from the gashes of No Man's Land 

Maybe some buddy knows, 

some sister, mother, sweetheart, 

maybe some girl who sat with him once 

when a two-horn silver moon 

slid on the peak of a house-roof gable, 

and promises lived m the air of the night, 

when the air was filled with promises, 

when any little slip-shoe lovey 

could pick a promise out of the air 

"Feed it to 'em, 

they lap it up, 

bull bull . . . bull," 

Said a movie newsreel camera man. 

Said a Washington newspaper correspondent. 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


287 


Said a baggage handler lugging a trunk. 

Said a two-a-day vaudeville juggler. 

Said a hanky-pank selling jumping-jacks 
“Hokum— they lap it up,'' said the bunch 

And a tall scar-face ball player, 

Played out as a ball player, 

Made a speech of his own for the hero boy, 

Sent an earful of his own to the dead buck private 
“It's all safe now, buddy. 

Safe when you say yes, 

Safe for the yes-men " 

He was a tall scar-face battler 
With his face in a newspaper 
Reading want ads, reading jokes, 

Reading love, murder, politics. 

Jumping from jokes back to the want ads, 

Reading the want ads first and last. 

The letters of the word JOB, “J-O-B," 

Burnt like a shot of bootleg booze 
In the bones of his head— 

In the wish of his scar-face eyes 
The honorable orators. 

Always the honorable orators. 

Buttoning the buttons on their prinz alberts. 

Pronouncing the syllables “sac-ri-fice," 

Juggling those bitter salt-soaked syllables— 

Do they ever gag with hot ashes in their mouths^ 

Do their tongues ever shrivel with a pain of fire 
Across those simple syllables “sac-ri-fice"? 

(There was one orator people far off saw 
He had on a gunnysack shirt over his bones, 

And he lifted an elbow socket over his head, 

And he lifted a skinny signal finger 
And he had nothing to say, nothing easy— 

He mentioned ten million men, mentioned them as having gone west, 
mentioned them as shoving up the daisies 


288 


  


We could write it all on a postage stamp, what he said 
He said it and quit and faded away, 

A gunnysack shirt on his hones ) 

Stars of the night sky, 

did you see that phantom fadeout, 

did you see those phantom riders, 

skeleton riders on skeleton horses, 

stems of roses in their teeth, 

rose leaves red on white-jaw slants, 

grinning along on Pennsylvania Avenue, 

the top-sergeants calling roll calls— 

did their horses nicker a horse laugh? 

did the ghosts of the honey battalions 

move out and on, up the Potomac, over on the Ohio, 

and out to the Mississippi, the Missouri, the Red River 

and down to the Rio Grande, and on to the Yazoo, 

over to the Chattahoochee and up to the Rappahannock? 

did you see 'em, stars of the night sky? 

And so today— they lay him away— 
the hoy nohody knows the name of— 
they lay him away in granite and steel — 
with music and roses— under a flag- 
under a sky of promises 


BLACK HORIZONS 

Black horizons, come up 
Black horizons, kiss me. 

That IS all, so many lies, killing so cheap, 
hahies so cheap; blood, people, so cheap, and 
land high, land dear, a speck of the earth 
costs, a suck at the tit of Mother Dirt so 
clean and strong, it costs, fences, papers, 
shenffs, fences, laws, guns, and so many 
stars and so few hours to dream; such a big 
song and so little a footmg to stand and 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


289 


Sing, take a look, wars to come, red rivers 
to cross 

Black horizons, come up 
Black horizons, kiss me 


SEA SLANT 

On up the sea slant, 

On up the horizon. 

This ship limps 

The bone of her nose fog-gray. 
The heart of her sea-strong. 
She came a long way. 

She goes a long way 

On up the honzon. 

On up the sea-slant. 

She limps sea-strong, fog-gray 

She IS a green-ht night gray 
She comes and goes m sea fog 
Up the horizon slant she limps 


UPSTREAM 

The strong men keep coming on 

They go down shot, hanged, sick, 
broken 

They live on fighting, singing, 
lucky as plungers 

The strong mothers pulling them 
on 

The strong mothers pulling them 
from a dark sea, a great praine, 
a long mountain 

Call hallelujah, call amen, call 
deep thanks. 

The strong men keep coming on. 


290 


  


FOUR STEICHEN PRINTS 

The earth, the rock and the oil of the earth, the slippery frozen places of 
the earth, these are for homes of rainbow bubbles, curves of the circles 
of a bubble, curves of the arcs of the rainbow prisms— between sun and 
rock they lift to the sun their foam feather and go 

Throw your neck back, throw it back till the neck muscles shine at the 
sun, till the falling hair at the scalp is a black cry, till limbs and knee 
bones form an altar, and a girFs torso over the fire-rock torso shouts hi yi, 
hi yee, hallelujah 

Goat girl caught in the brambles, deerfoot or fox-head, ankles and hair 
of feeders of the wind, let all the covering burn, let all stopping a naked 
plunger from plunging naked, let it all burn in this wind fire, let the fire 
have it in a fast crunch and a flash 

They threw you into a pot of thorns with a wreath in your hair and 
bunches of grapes over your head— -your hard little buttocks in the 
thorns— then the black eyes, the white teeth, the nameless muscular flair 
of you, rippled and twisted m sliding rising scales of laughter, the earth 
never had a gladder friend, pigs, goats, deer, tawny tough-haired jaguars 
might understand you 


FINS 

Plow over bars of sea plowing, 
the moon by moon work of the sea, 
the plowing, sand and rock, must 
be done 

Ride over, ride over bars of sea riding, 
the sun and the blue nding of the sea— 
sit m the saddles and say it, sea riders 



SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


291 


Slant up and go, silver breakers, mix 
the high howls of your dancing, shoot 
your laugh of rainbow foam tops 

Foam wings, fly, pick the comers, the fin pink, 
the belly green, the blue ram sparks, the 
white wave spit— fly, you foam wings 

The men of the sea are gone to work, the women 
of the sea are oflE buying new hats, combs, clocks, 
it IS rust and gold on the roofs of the sea 


BEAT, OLD HEART 

Beat, old heart, these are the old bars 
All strugglers have beat against 
Beat on these bars like the old sea 
Beats on the rocks and beaches 
Beat here like the old winter winds 
Beat on the praines and timbers 
Old grizzlies, eagles, buffalo. 

Their paws and beaks register this 
Their hides and heads say it with scars. 


MOON RIDERS 
1 

What have I saved out of a morning? 

The earliest of the morning came with moon-mist 

And the travel of a moon-spilt purple. 

Bars, horseshoes, Texas longhorns. 

Linked m night silver. 

Linked under leaves in moonlit silver. 

Linked in rags and patches 

Out of the ice houses of the morning moon 

Yes, this was the earliest— 

Before the cowpunchers on the eastern rims 



292 


  


Began riding into the sun. 

Riding the roan mustangs of morning, 

Roping the mavericks after the latest stars 
What have I saved out of a morning? 

Was there a child face I saw once 
Smiling up a stairway of the morning moon? 

2 

"It IS time for work,"' said a man m the morning 
He opened the faces of the clocks, saw their works, 

Saw the wheels oiled and fitted, running smooth 
"'It IS time to begin a day's work," he said again. 

Watching a bull-finch hop on the ram-worn boards 
Of a beaten fence counting its bitter winters 
The slinging feet of the bull-finch and the flash 
Of its flying feathers as it flipped away 
Took his eyes away from the clocks, his flying eyes 
He walked over, stood in front of the clocks again 
And said, ""I'm sorry, I apologize forty ways " 

3 

The morning paper lay bundled 
Like a spear m a museum 
Across the broken sleeping room 
Of a moon-sheet spider. 

The spinning work of the morning spider's feet 
Left off where the morning paper's pages lay 
In the shine of the web in the summer dew grass 
The man opened the morning paper, saw the first page, 

The back page, the inside pages, the editorials, 

Saw the world go by, eating, stealing, fighting. 

Saw the headlines, date lines, funnies, ads, 

The marching movies of the workmen going to work, the workmen striking. 
The workmen asking )obs— five million pairs of eyes look for a boss and 
say, ""Take me," 

People eating with too much to eat, people eating with nothing in sight 
to eat tomorrow, eating as though eating belongs where people belong 

""Hustle, you hustlers, while the bustling's good," 

Said the man, turning the morning paper's pages, 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


293 


Turning among headlines, date lines, funnies, ads 
“Hustlers carrying the banner,” said the man 
Dropping the paper and beginning to hunt the city, 

Hunting the alleys, boulevards, back-door by-ways. 

Hunting till he found a blind horse dying alone. 

Telling the horse, “Two legs or four legs— it’s all the same with a work 
plug” 

A hayfield mist of evening saw him 
Watching moon nders lose the moon 
For new shooting stars— he asked, 

“Chnst, what have I saved out of a morning?” 

He called up a stairway of the morning moon 

And he remembered a child face smiling up that same stairway 


AT THE GATES OF TOMBS 

Civilizations are set up and knocked down 
the same as pins in a bowling alley 

Civilizations get into the garbage wagons 
and are hauled away the same as potato 
peelings or any pot scrapings 

Civilizations, all the work of the artists, 
inventors, dreamers of work and genius, 
go to the dumps one by one 

Be silent about it, since at the gates of tombs 
silence is a gift, be silent, smce at the epitaphs 
written in the air, smce at the swan songs hung in 
the air, silence is a gift, be silent, forget it 

If any fool, babbler, gabby mouth, stand up and say 
Let us make a civilization where the sacred and 
beautiful things of toil and genius shall last— 

If any such noisy gazook stands up and makes himself 
heard — put him out — tie a can on him — lock him up 


  


in Leavenworth— shackle him m the Atlanta hoosegow 
—let him eat from the tin dishes at Smg Sing- 
slew him in as a lifer at San Quentin 

It IS the law, as a civilization dies and goes down 
to eat ashes along with all other dead civilizations 
—it is the law all dirty wild dreamers die first- 
gag 'em, lock 'em up, get 'em bumped off 

And since at the gates of tombs silence is a gift, 
be silent about it, yes, be silent— forget it 


HAZARDOUS OCCUPATIONS 

Jugglers keep six bottles in the air 
Club swingers toss up six and eight 
The knife throwers miss each other's 
ears by a hair and the steel quivers 
in the target wood 

The trapeze battlers do a back-and-forth 
high in the air with a girl's feet 
and ankles upside down 
So they earn a living— till they miss 
once, twice, even three times 
So they live on hate and love as gypsies 
live in satin skins and shiny eyes 
In their graves do the elbows jostle once 
in a blue moon— and wnggle to throw 
a kiss answering a dreamed-of applause? 
Do the bones repeat It's a good act— 
we got a good hand , . ? 


PROPS 

1 

Roll open this rug a minx is 
in it, see her toe wiggling, 
roll open the rug; she is a 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


295 

runaway, or somebody is trying 
to steal her, here she is, 
here's your minx, how can we 
have a play unless we have 
this mmx^ 

2 

The child goes out in the storm 
stage thunder, ''erring daughter, 
never darken this doorsill again", 
the tender parents speak their curse; 
the child puts a few knick-knacks in 
a handkerchief, and the child goes, 
the door closes and the child goes, 
she is out now, in the storm on the 
stage, out forever, snow, you son-of-a-gun, 
snow, turn on the snow 

GYPSY MOTHER 

In a hole-in-a-wall on Halsted Street sits a gypsy woman, 

In a garish gas-lit rendezvous, m a humpback higgling hole-in-a-wall 

The left hand is a tattler, stars and oaths and alphabets 

Commit themselves and tell happenings gone, happenings to come, path- 
ways of honest people, hypocrites 

"Long pointed fingers mean imagination, a star on the third finger says a 
black shadow walks near " 

Cross the gypsy's hand with fifty cents and she takes your left hand and 
reads how you shall be happy in love, or not, and whether you die 
rich, or not 

Signs outside the hole-in-a-wall say so, misspell the promises, scrawl the 
superior gypsy mysteries 

A red shawl on her shoulders falls with a fringe hem to a green skirt, 

Chains of yellow beads sweep from her neck to her tawny hands 

Fifty springtimes must have kissed her mouth holding a calabash pipe 

She pulls slow contemplative puffs of smoke, she is a shape for ghosts of 


296 


  


contemplation to sit around and ask why something cheap as happi- 
ness IS here and more besides, chapped lips, rough eyes, red shawl 
She IS thinking about somebody and something the same as Whistler's 
mother sat and thought about somebody and something 

In a hole-in-a-wall on Halsted Street are stars, oaths, alphabets 


GOLD MUD 
(ForR F) 

The pot of gold at the rainbow end 
is a pot of mud, gold mud, 
slippery shining mud 

Pour it on your hair and you will 
have a golden hair 
Pour it on your cat and you will 
have a golden cat 
Pour it on your clock and you will 
have a golden clock 

Pour it on a dead man's thumb and 
you will have a golden thumb 
to bring you bad dreams 
Pour it on a dead woman's ear and 
you will have a golden ear 
to tell hard luck stories to 
Pour it on a horse chestnut and you 
will have a golden buckeye 
changing your luck 
Pour it in the shape of a holy cross, 

fasten it on my shirt for me to wear 
and I will have a keepsake 
I will touch it and say a prayer for you. 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


297 


CROSSING THE PACES 

The Sioux sat around their wigwam fires 
in winter with some papooses hung up 
and some laid down 

And the Sioux had a saying, 'Xove grows 
like hair on a black bear’s skin ” 

The Arabians spill this The first gray 
hair IS a challenge of death 
A Polish blacksmith A good black- 
smith IS not afraid of smoke 
And a Scandinavian warns The world was bom 
in fire and he who is fire himself will be 
at home anywhere on earth 
So a stranger told his children You are 
strangers— and warned them 

Bob your hair, or let it grow long, 

Be a company, a party, a picnic, 

Be alone, a nut, a potato, an orange blossom, 
a keg of nails, if you get lost try a 
want ad, if night comes try a long sleep 


COUPLES 

Sec miasmic women m green 
danced an absinthe dance 
hissing oaths of laughter 
at SIX men they cheated 

Six miasmic men did the same 
for SIX women they cheated. 

It was a Stand-off 
in oaths of laughter hissed. 



298 


  


The dirt is hard where they danced 
The pads of their feet made a floor 

The weeds wear moon mist mourning veils. 
The weeds come high as six little crosses, 
One little cross for each couple 


CALIGARI 

Mannikins, we command you 

Stand up with your white beautiful skulls 

Stand up with your moaning sockets 

Dance your stiff limping dances 

We handle you with spic and span gloves 

We tell you when and how 

And how much 


FEATHER LIGHTS 

Macabre and golden the moon opened a slant of light 
A tnangle for an oriole to stand and sing, “Take me home ” 

A layer of thin white gold feathers for a child queen of gypsies 

So the moon opened a slant of light and let it go 

So the lonesome dogs, the fog moon, the pearl mist, came back 


PEARL HORIZONS 

Under a prame fog moon 
in a circle of pearl mist honzons, 
a few lonesome dogs scraping thongs, 
midnight is lonely, the fog moon midnight 
takes up again its even smooth November 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


299 


Memories you can flick me and sting me 
Memories, you can hold me even and smooth 

A circle of pearl mist horizons 

is not a woman to be walked up to and kissed, 

nor a child to be taken and held for a good night, 

nor any old coffee-drinking pal to be smiled at m the eyes and left with 
a grip and a handshake 

Pearl memories m the mist circling the horizon, 
flick me, sting me, hold me even and smooth 


HOOF DUSK 


The dusk of this box wood 
is leather gold, buckskin gold, 
and the hoofs of a dusk goat 
leave their heel marks on it 


The cover of this wooden box 
IS a last-of-the-sunset red, 
a red with a sandman sand 
fixed in evening siftings— 
late evening sands are here 

The gold of old clocks, 
forgotten in garrets, 
hidden out between battles 
of long wars and short wars, 
the smoldering ember gold 
of old clocks found again— 
here 1$ the small smoke fadeout 
of their slow loitering 


Feel me with your fingers, 

measure me in fire and wind 

maybe I am buckskin gold, old clock gold, 

late evening sunset sand — 

Let go 
and loiter 

in the smoke fadeout 


300 


  


HARSK, HARSK 

X 

Harsk, harsk, the wind blows tonight 
What a night for a baby to come into the worlds 
What a night for a melodrama baby to come 
And the father wondering 
And the mother wondering 
What the years will bring on their stork feet 
Till a year when this very baby might be saying 
On some storm night when a melodrama baby is born 
'What a night 
for a baby 

to come into the world’ J’' 

Harsk, harsk, the wind blows tonight 

2 

It IS five months off 

Knit, stitch, and hemstitch 

Sheets, bags, towels, these are the offerings 

When he is older— or she is a big girl— 

There may be flowers or ribbons or money 
For birthday offerings Now, however. 

We must remember it is a naked stranger 
Coming to us, and the sheath of the arrival 
Is so soft we must be ready, and soft too 
Knit, stitch, hemstitch, it is only five months 

3 

It would be easy to pick a lucky star for this baby 
If a choice of two stars lay before our eyes. 

One a pearl gold star and one pearl silver. 

And the offer of a chance to pick a lucky star, 

4 

When the high hour comes 
Let there be a light flurry of snow, 

A little zigzag of white spots 
Against the gray roofs. 

The snow-born all understand this as a luck-wish 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


SOI 


BRANCUSI 

Brancusi is a galoot, he saves tickets to take him nowhere, a galoot with 
his baggage ready and no timetable, ah yes, Brancusi is a galoot, he 
understands birds and skulls so well, he knows the hang of the hair of 
the coils and plaits on a woman's head, he knows them so far back he 
knows where they came from and where they are going, he is fathoming 
down for the secrets of the first and the oldest makers of shapes 

Let us speak with loose mouths today not at all about Brancusi because 
he has hardly started nor is hardly able to say the name of the place he 
wants to go when he has time and is ready to start, O Brancusi, keeping 
hardwood planks around your doorsteps in the sun waiting for the hard- 
wood to be harder for your hard hands to handle, you Brancusi with 
your chisels and hammers, birds going to cones, skulls going to eggs— 
how the hope hugs your heart you will find one cone, one egg, so hard 
when the earth turns mist there among the last to go will be a cone, 
an egg 

Brancusi, you wall not put a want ad in the papers telling God it will 
be to his advantage to come around and see you, you will not grow 
gabbv and spill God earfuls of prayers, you will not get fresh and familiar 
as if God IS a next-door neighbor and you have counted His shirts on a 
clothes line, you will go stammering, stuttering and mumbling or you will 
be silent as a mouse in a church garret when the pipe organ is pouring 
ocean waves on the sunlit rocks of ocean shores, if God is saving a corner 
for any battling bag of bones, there will be one for you, there will be 
one for you, Brancusi 


AMBASSADORS OF GRIEF 

There was a little fliv of a woman loved one man and lost out And she 
took up with another and it was a blank again And she cried to God 
the whole layout was a fake and a frame-up And when she took up with 
Number Three she found the fires burnt out, the love power, gone. And 
she wrote a letter to God and dropped it in a mail-box. The letter said. 

O God, ain't there some way you can fix it up so the little flivs of women, 
ready to throw themselves in front of railroad trains for men they love. 


302 


  


can have a chance? I guessed the wrong keys, I battered on the wrong 
panels, I picked the wrong roads O God, ain't there no way to guess 
again and start all over back where I had the keys in my hands, back 
where the roads all came together and I had my pick? 

And the letter went to Washington, D C , dumped into a dump where 
all letters go addressed to God— and no house number 


WITHOUT THE CANE AND THE DERBY 
{ForC C) 

The woman had done him wrong 

Either that or the woman was clean as a white rose in the morning 
gauze of dew 

It was either one or the other or it was the two things, right and wrong, 
woven together like two braids of a woman's head of hair hanging 
down woven together 

The room is dark The door opens It is Charlie playing for his friends 
after dinner, ''the marvelous urchin, the little genius of the screen," 
(chatter it like a monkey's running laughter cry ) 

No it is not Charlie it is somebody else It is a man, gray 
shirt, bandana, dark face A candle in his left hand throws a slant 
of light on the dark face The door closes slow The right hand leaves 
the door knob slow 

He looks at something What is it? A white sheet on a table He takes 
two long soft steps He runs the candle light around a hump in the 
sheet He lifts the sheet slow, sad like 

A woman's head of hair shows, a woman's white face He takes the head 
between his hands and looks long at it His fingers trickle under the 
sheet, snap loose something, bring out fingers full of a pearl neck- 
lace. 

He covers the face and the head of hair with the white sheet He takes 
a step toward the door The necklace slips into his pocket off the 
fingers of his right hand His left hand lifts the candle for a good-by 
look 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 303 

Knock, knock, knock A knocking the same as the time of the human 
heartbeat. 

Knock, knock, knock, first louder, then lower Knock, knock, knock, the 
same as the time of the human heartbeat. 

He sets the candle on the floor leaps to the white sheet rips it 
back has his fingers at the neck, his thumbs at the throat, and 
does three slow fierce motions of strangling 

The knocking stops All is quiet He covers the face and the head of hair 
with the white sheet, steps back, picks up the candle and listens 

Knock, knock, knock, a knocking the same as the time of the human 
heartbeat 

Knock, knock, knock, first louder, then lower Knock, knock, knock, the 
same as the time of the human heartbeat 

Again the candle to the floor, the leap, the slow fierce motions of 
strangling, the cover-up of the face and the head of hair, the step 
back, the listening 

And again the knock, knock, knock . louder . lower . to the 
time of the human heartbeat 

Once more the motions of strangling • then nothing at all 
nothing at all no more knocking no knocking at all 
no knocking at all • . in the time of the human heartbeat 

He stands at the door peace, peace, peace everywhere only in the 
man's face so dark and his eyes so lighted up with many lights, no 
peace at all, no peace at all 

So he stands at the door, his nght hand on the door knob, the candle 
slants of light fall and flicker from his face to the straight white sheet 
changing gray against shadows 

So there is peace everywhere . no more knocking no knocking 
at all to the time of the human heartbeat so he stands at the 
door and his nght hand on the door knob. 

And there is peace everywhere . only the man's face is a red gray 
plaster of storm in the center of peace . so he stands with a 
candle at the door . so he stands with a red gray face 

After he steps out the door closes, the door, the door knob, the table, the 
white sheet, there is nothing at all, the owners are shadows, the 
owners are gone, not even a knocking, not even a knock, knock, 
knock louder, lower, in the time of the human heartbeat 


304 


  


The lights are snapped on Charlie, “the marvelous urchin, the little 
genius of the screen” (chatter it with a running monkey’s laughter 
cry) Charlie is laughing a laugh the whole world knows 
The room is full of cream yellow lights Charlie is laughing louder 
lower 

And again the heartbeats laugh the human heartbeats laugh 


THE RAKEOFF AND THE GETAWAY 

“Shall we come back?” the gamblers asked 
“If you want to, if you feel that way,” the answer 

And they must have wanted to, 

they must have felt that way, 

for they came back, 

hats pulled down over their eyes 

as though the rain or the policemen 

or the shadows of a sneaking scar-face Nemesis 

followed their tracks and hunted them down 

“What was the clean-up? Let’s see the rakeoff,” 

somebody asked them, looking into their eyes 

far under the pulled-dovra hat nms, 

and their eyes had only the laugh of the rain in them, 

lights of escape from a sneaking scar-face Nemesis 

hunting their tracks, hunting them down 

Anvils, pincers, mosqmtoes, anguish, raspbemes, 
steaks and gravy, remorse, ragtime, slang, 
a woman’s looking-glass to be held in the hand 
for looking at the face and the face make-up, 
blackwmg birds fitted onto slits 
of the sunsets they were flymg into, 
bitter green waters, clear running waters, 
standing pools rmging the changes 
of all the triangles of the equmoxes of the sky, 
and a woman’s slipper 
with a tarnished buckle, 
a tarnished Chmese silver buckle 



SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


305 


The gamblers snatched their hats off babbling, 
''Some layout— take your pick, kid '' 

And their eyes had yet m them 
the laugh of the ram 
and the lights of their getaway 
from a sneaking scar-face Nemesis 


TWO HUMPTIES 

They tried to hand it to us on a platter, 

Us hit in the eyes with marcomgrams from moon dancers— 
And the bubble busted, went flooey, on a thumb touch. 

So this time again, Humpty, 

We cork our laughs behind solemn phizzogs, 

Sweep the floor with the rim of our hats 
And say good-a-by and good-a-by, just like that. 

Tomonow maybe they will be hit 
in the eyes with marcomgrams 
From moon dancers 

Good-a-by, our hats and all of us say good-a-by. 


IMPROVED FARM LAND 

Tall timber stood here once, here on a corn belt farm along the Monon 

Here the roots of a half mile of trees dug their runners deep in the loam 
for a grip and a hold against wind storms 

Then the axmen came and the chips flew to the zmg of steel and handle— 
the lank railsplitters cut the big ones first, the beeches and the oaks, 
then the brush 

Dynamite, wagons and horses took the stumps— the plows sunk their 
teeth in— now it is first class com land— improved property— and the 
hogs grunt over the fodder crops 

It would come hard now for this half mile of improved farm land along 
the Monon com belt, on a piece of Grand Frame, to remember once 
it had a great singing family of trees. 



3o6 


  


HELL ON THE WABASH 

When country fiddlers held a convention in 
Danville, the big money went to a barn dance 
artist who played Turkey in the Straw, with 
variations 

They asked him the name of the piece calling 
it a humdinger and he answered, “I call it 
^Hell On The Wabash’^’ 

The two next best were The Speckled Hen, and 
Sweet Potatoes Grow in Sandy Land, with 
variations 


THIS-FOR THE MOON-YES? 

This is a good book? Yes? 

Throw it at the moon 
Stand on the ball of your right foot 
And come to the lunge of a center fielder 
Straddling in a throw for the home plate. 

Let her go— spang— this book for the moon 
—yes? 

And then— other books, good books, even the 
best books— shoot ’em with a long twist 
at the moon— yes? 


PRIMER LESSON 

Look out how you use proud words 
When you let proud words go, it is 
not easy to call them back 
They wear long boots, hard boots, they 
walk off proud, they can’t hear you 
calling— 

Look out how you use proud words. 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


307 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 
1 

Into the night, into the blanket of night. 

Into the night ram gods, the night luck gods, 

Overland goes the overland passenger tram 

Stand up, sandstone slabs of red, 

Tell the overland passengers who burnt you 

Tell 'em how the jacks and screws loosened you 

Tell 'em who shook you by the heels and stood you on your heads. 

Who put the slow pink of sunset mist on your faces. 

Panels of the cold gray open night, 

Gates of the Great American Desert, 

Skies keeping the prayers of the wagon men. 

The nders with picks, shovels and guns, 

On the old trail, the Santa Fe trail, the Raton pass 
Panels, skies, gates, listen tonight while we send up our prayers on the 
Santa F6 trail 

(A colossal bastard frog 
squats in stone 
Once he squawked 
Then he was frozen and 
shut up forever ) 

Into the night the overland passenger tram. 

Slabs of sandstone red sink to the sunset red. 

Blankets of night cover 'em up 

Night rain gods, night luck gods, are looking on 

March on, processions 

Tie your hat to the saddle and ride, O Rider 
Let your ponies drag their navels in the sand 
Go hungry, leave your bones in the desert sand. 

When the desert takes you the wind is clean 
The winds say so on a noisy night 


3o8 


  


The fingerbone of a man 

lay next to the handle of a frying pan 

and the footbone of a horse 

''Clean, we are clean," the winds whimper on a noisy night 

Into the night the overland passenger tram. 

And the engineer with an eye for signal lights, 

And the porters making up berths for passengers, 

And the boys in the diner locbng the icebox— 

And SIX men with cigars in the buffet car mention "civilization," "his- 
tory," "God" 

Into the blanket of night goes the overland tram. 

Into the black of the night the processions march. 

The ghost of a pony goes by, 

A hat tied to the saddle. 

The wagon tongue of a prairie schooner 
And the handle of a Forty-niner's pickax 
Do a shiver dance m the desert dust. 

In the coyote gray of the alkali dust 

And— six men with cigars in the buffet car mention "civilization," "his- 
tory," "God" 

Sleep, O wonderful hungry people 
Take a shut-eye, take a long old snooze, 
and be good to yourselves. 

Into the night the overland passenger tram 
And the sleepers cleared for a morning sun 
and the Grand Canyon of Arizona 

2 

A bluejay blue 

and a gray mouse gray 

ran up the canyon walls 

A rider came to the nm 

Of a slash and a gap of desert dirt— 

A long-legged long-headed nder 
On a blunt and a blurry jackass— 

Riding and asking, "How come? How come?" 



SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


And the long-legged long-headed rider said 
'^Between two ears of a blurry jackass 
I see ten miles of auburn, gold and purple— 

I see doors open over doorsills 

And always another door and a doorsill 

Cheat my eyes, fill me with the float 

Of your dream, you auburn, gold, and purple 

Cheat me, blow me off my pins onto footless floors 

Let me put footsteps in an airpath 

Cheat me with footprints on auburn, gold, purple 

Out to the last violet shimmer of the float 

Of the dream— and I will come straddling a jackass. 

Singing a song and letting out hallelujahs 

To the doorsill of the last footprint '' 

And the man took a stub lead pencil 
And made a long memo in shorthand 
On the two blurry jackass ears — 

''God sits with long whiskers in the sky ” 

I said it when I was a boy 
I said it because long-whiskered men 
Put it in my head to say it 

They lied about you God 
They lied 

The other side of the five doors 
and doorsills put in my house- 
how many hinges, panels, doorknobs, 
how many locks and lintels, 
put on the doors and doorsills 
winding and wild between 
the first and the last doorsill of alP 

"Out of the footprints on ten miles 
of auburn, gold and purple— an old song comes 
These bones shall rise again, 

Yes, children, these bones shall nse 


309 


"Yonder past my five doors 
are fifty million doors, maybe. 


  


3^0 

stars with knobs and locks and lintels, 
stars with riders of rockets, 
stars with swimmers of fire 

''Cheat my eyes— and I come again— 
straddling a jackass— singing a song— 
letting out hallelujahs 

"If God IS a proud and a cunning Bricklayer, 

Or if God IS a King in a white gold Heaven, 

Or if God IS a Boss and a Watchman always watching, 
I come riding the old nde of the humiliation, 

Straddling a jackass, singing a song, 

Letting out hallelujahs 

"Before a ten mile float 
of auburn, gold, and purple, 
footprints on a sunset airpath haze, 

I ask 

How can I taste with my tongue a tongueless God^ 
How can I touch with my fingers a fingerless God? 
How can I hear with my ears an earless God? 

Or smell of a God gone noseless long ago? 

Or look on a God who never needs eyes for looking? 

"My head is under your foot, God 
My head is a pan of alkali dust 
your foot kicked loose— your foot of air 
with its steps on the sunset airpath haze 

(A bluejay blue 

and a gray mouse gray 

ran up the canyon walls) 

"Sitting at the nm of the big gap 

at the high lash of the frozen storm line, 

I ask why I go on five crutches, 
tongues, ears, nostnls— all cripples— 
eyes and nose— both cripples— 

I ask why these five cripples 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


311 


limp and squint and gag with me, 
why they say with the oldest frozen faces 
Man IS a poor stick and a sad squirt, 
if he IS poor he can’t dress up, 
if he dresses up he don’t know any place to go 

“Away and away on some green moon 
a blind blue horse eats white grass 

And the blind blue horse knows more than I do 
because he saw more than I have seen 
and remembered it after he went blind 

“And away and away on some other green moon 
IS a sea-kept child who lacks a nose I got 
and fingers like mine and all I have 
And yet the sea-kept child knows more than 
I do and sings secrets alien to me as light 
to a nosing mole underground 
I understand this child as a yellow-belly 
catfish in China understands peach pickers 
at sunrise in September in a Michigan orchard 

“The power and lift of the sea 

and the flame of the old earth fires under, 

I sift their meanings of sand in my fingers 
I send out five sleepwalkers to find out who I am, 
my name and number, where I came from, 
and where I am going 

They go out, look, listen, wonder, and shoot a fire-white rocket across 
the night sky, the shot and the flare of the rocket dies to a whisper; 
and the night is the same as it always was 
They come back, my five sleepwalkers, they have an answer for me, they 
say, they tell me Wait— the password all of them heard when the 
fixe-white rocket shot across the sky and died to a whisper, the pass- 
word is Wait 

“I sit with five bmoculars, amplifiers, spectroscopes 

I sit looking through five windows, listening, tasfang, smelling, touching 

I sit counting five million smoke fogs 

Repeaters, repeaters, come back to my window-sills. 



312 


  


Some are pigeons coming to coo and coo and clean their tail feathers 
and look wise at me 

Some are pigeons coming with broken wings to die with pain in their 
eyes on my window-sills 

'1 walk the high lash of the frozen storm line, 

I sit down with my feet in a ten-mile gravel pit 
Here I ask why I am a bag of sea-water fastened 
to a frame of bones put walking on land—here I 
look at crawlers, crimson, spiders spotted with 
purple spots on their heads, flinging silver nets, 
two, four, six, against the sun 
Here I look two miles down to the ditch of the sea 
and pick a winding ribbon, a river eater, a water 
grinder, it is a runner sent to mn by a stop-watch, 
it is a wrecker on a rush job 

(A bluejay blue 

and a gray mouse gray 

ran up the canyon walls ) 

Battering rams, blind mules, mounted policemen, 
trucks hauling caverns of granite, elephants 
grappling gorillas m a death strangle, cathedrals, 
arenas, platforms, somersaults of telescoped rail- 
road train wrecks, exhausted egg heads, piles of 
skulls, mountains of empty sockets, mummies of kings 
and mobs, memories of work gangs and wrecking crews, 
sobs of wind and water storms, all frozen and held 
on paths leading on to spirals of new zigzags-— 

An arm-chair for a one-eyed giant; 

two pine trees grow in the left arm of the chair, 

a bluejay comes, sits, goes, comes again, 

a bluejay shoots and twitters . out and across • . . 

tumbled skyscrapers and wrecked battleships, 

walls of cmcifixions and wedding breakfasts, 

rum, rum— a brute gnashed, dug, kept on- 

kept on and quit and this is It 


SLABS OF THE SUNBURNT WEST 


313 


Falling away, the brute is worhng 

Sheets of white veils cross a woman’s face 

An eye socket glooms and wonders 

The brute hangs his head and drags on to the ]oh 

The mother of mist and light and air murmurs Wait 

The weavers of light weave best in red, 
better in blue 

The weavers of shadows weave at sunset, 

ihe young black-eyed women run, mn, run 
to the night star homes, the old women 
sit weaving for the night ram gods, 
the night luck gods 

Eighteen old giants throw a red gold shadow ball, 
they pass it along, hands go up and stop it, they 
bat up flies and practice, they begin the game, they 
knock it for home mns and two-baggers, the pitcher 
put it across in an out- and an m-shoot drop, the 
Devil IS the Umpire, God is the Umpire, the game 
IS called on account of darkness 

A bluejay blue 

and a gray mouse gray 

ran up the canyon walls 


3 

Good night, it is scnbbled on the panels 
of the cold gray open desert 
Good night, on the big sky blanket over the 
Santa Fe trail it is woven m the oldest 
Indian blanket songs 

Buffers of land, breakers of sea, say it and 
say it, over and over, good night, good night 

Tie your hat to the saddle 
and nde, nde, nde, O Rider 
Lay your rails and wires 
and nde, nde, nde, O Rider. 


3H 


  


The worn tired stars say 
you shall die early and die dirty 
The clean cold stars say 
you shall die late and die clean 

The runaway stars say 
you shall never die at all, 
never at all 




TO 

A H 



TENTATIVE (FIRST MODEL) 

DEFINITIONS OF POETRY 

1 Poetry is a projection across silence of cadences arranged to break 

that silence with definite intentions of echoes^ syllables^ wave 
lengths 

2 Poetry is an art practised with the temhly plastic material of human 

language 

3 Poetry is the report of a nuance between two moments, when people 

say, 'Listen and 'Did you see 'Did you hear iP What 
was iP' 

4 Poetry is the tracing of the trajectories of a finite sound to the infi- 

nite points of its echoes 

5 Poetry is a sequence of dots and dashes, spelling depths, crypts, cross- 

lights, and moon wisps 

6 Poetry is a puppet-show, where riders of skyrockets and divers of sea 

fathoms gossip about the sixth sense and the fourth dimension 

7 Poetry is a plan for a slit in the face of a bronze fountain goat and 

the path of fresh drinking water 

8 Poetry is a slipknot tightened around a time-beat of one thought, 

two thoughts, and a last interweaving thought there is not yet 
a number for 

9 Poetry is an echo asking a shadow dancer to be a partner 

10 Poetry is the journal of a sea animal living on land, wanting to fly 
the air. 


3^7 



  


f!! 

11 PoetTy IS a series of explanations of life, fading off into horizons too 

swift for explanations 

12 Poetry is a fossil rock-print of a fin and a wing, with an illegible oath 

between 

13 Poetry is an exhibit of one pendulum connecting with other and 

unseen pendulums inside and outside the one seen 

14 Poetry is a sky dark with a wild-duck migration 

15 Poetry is a search for syllables to shoot at the barriers of the un- 

known and the unknowable 

16 Poetry is any page from a sketchbook of outlines of a doorknob with 

thumb-prints of dust, blood, dreams 

17 Poetry is a type-font design for an alphabet of fun, hate, love, death 

18 Poetry is the cipher key to the five mystic wishes packed in a hollow 

silver bullet fed to a flying fish 

19 Poetry is a theorem of a yellow-silk handkerchief knotted with riddles, 

sealed in a balloon tied to the tail of a kite flying in a white wind 
against a blue sky in spring 

20 Poetry is a dance music measuring buck-and-wmg follies along with 

the gravest and stateliest dead-marches 

21 Poetry is a sliver of the moon lost in the belly of a golden frog 

22 Poetry is a mock of a cry at finding a million dollars and a mock of 

a laugh at losing it 

23 Poetry is the silence and speech between a wet struggling root of a 

flower and a sunlit blossom of that flower 

24 Poetry is the harnessing of the paradox of earth cradling life and then 

entombing it 

25 Poetry is the opening and closing of a door, leaving those who look 

through to guess about what is seen during a moment 

26 Poetry is a fresh morning spider-web telling a story of moonlit hours 

of weaving and waiting dunng a night 

27 Poetry is a statement of a series of equations, with numbers and sym- 

bob changing like the changes of mirrors, pools, skies, the only 
never-changing sign being the sign of infinity 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


319 


28 Poetry is a packsack of invisible keepsakes 

29 Poetry is a section of nver^fog and moving boat-lights^ delivered be 

neonate bridges and whistles, $0 one says, and another, 

^How^^ 

30 Poetry is a kinetic arrangement of static syllables 

31 Poetry is the arithmetic of the easiest way and the primrose path, 

matched up with foam-flanked horses, bloody knuckles, and 
bones, on the hard ways to the stars 

32 Poetry is a shuffling of boxes of illusions buckled with a strap of facts 

33 Poetry is an enumeration of birds, bees, babies, butterflies, bugs, bam- 

binos, babayagas, and bipeds, beating their way up bewildering 
bastions 

34 Poetry is a phantom script telling how rainbows are made and why 

they go away 

35 Poetry is the establishment of a metaphorical link between white 

butterfly-wings and the scraps of torn-up love-letters 

36 Poetry is the achievement of the synthesis of hyacinths and biscuits 

37 Poetry is a mystic, sensuous mathematics of fire, smoke-stacks, waffles, 

pansies, people, and purple sunsets 

38 Poetry is the capture of a picture, a song, or a flair, m a deliberate 

prism of words. 




GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


1 

In the evening there is a sunset sonata comes to the cities 
There is a march of little armies to the dwindling of drums 
The skyscrapers throw their tall lengths of walls into black bastions on 
the red west 

The skyscrapers fasten their perpendicular alphabets far across the chang 
mg silver triangles of stars and streets 

And who made 'em? Who made the skyscrapers? 

Man made 'em, the little two-legged joker, Man 

Out of his head, out of his dreaming, scheming skypiece, 

Out of proud little diagrams that danced softly in his head-— Man made 
the skyscrapers 

With his two hands, with shovels, hammers, wheelbarrows, with engines, 
conveyors, signal whistles, with girders, molds, steel, concrete— 
Climbing on scaffolds and falsework with blueprints, riding the beams 
and dangling m mid-air to call. Come on, boys— 

Man made the skyscrapers 

When one tall skyscraper is torn down 
To make room for a taller one to go up, 

Who takes down and puts up those two skyscrapers? 

Man the little two-legged joker Man 

2 

^'There's gold in them hills," 

Said old timers on their wagon seats 
And on the wagons was a scribble: 

Pike's Peak or Bust. 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


321 


The Rocky Mountains are stacked tall on the skyline 
Sunrise and dawns wash on the skyline every morning 
Sunset feathers of foam float red and fade pink 

And so, 

Quite so, 

Facts are facts, nailed down, fastened to stay 
And facts are feathers, foam, flying phantoms 

Niagara is a fact or a little bluebird cheeping in a flight over the Falls— 
Chirping to itself What have we here? 

And how come? 

The stone humps of old mountains 
Sag and lift m a line to the sky 
The sunsets come with long shadowprmts 
The siK'Cylmder go-getters ask 
What time is it? 

Who were the Aztecs and the 
Zunis anyhow? 

What do I care about Cahokia? 

Where do we go from here? 

What are the facts? 


3 

Facts stay fastened, facts are phantom 

An old one-horse plow is a fact 

A new farm tractor is a fact 

Facts stay fastened, facts fly with bird wings 

Blood and sweat are facts, and 

The commands of imagination, the looks back and ahead. 
The spirals, pivots, landing places, fadeaways. 

The signal lights and dark stars of civilizations. 

Now the head of a man, his eyes, are facts. 

He sees in his head, as in looking-glasses, 

A cathedral, ship, bridge, railroad— a skyscraper— 

And the plans are drawn, the blueprints fixed, 

The design and the line, the shape wntten clear 
So fact moves from fact to fact, weaves, intersects. 

Then come more, then come blood and sweat 


322 


  


Then come pam and death, lifting and groaning, 

And a crying out loud, between paydays 

Then the last ghost on the )ob walks 

The job stands up, the joined stresses of facts, 

The cathedral, ship, bridge, railroad— the skyscraper— 

Speaks a living hello to the open sky. 

Stretches forth as an acknowledgement 
'The big job is done 
By God, we made it 

Facts stay fastened, facts fly with phantom bird wings 

4 

I have looked over the earth and seen the swarming of different people 
to a different God- 

White men with prayers to a white God, black men with prayers to a 
black God, yellow-faces before altars to a yellow-face God— 

Amid burning fires they have pictured God with a naked skin, amid 
frozen rocks they have pictured God clothed and shaggy as a polar 
bear— 

I have met stubs of men broken in the pain and mutilation of war say- 
ing God IS forgetful and too far off, too far away— 

I have met people saying they talk with God face to face, they tell God, 
hello God and how are you God, they get familiar with God and 
hold intimate conversations— 

Yet I have met other people saying they are afraid to see God face to 
face for they would ask questions even as God might ask them 
questions 

I have seen these facts of God and man and anxious earthworms hunt- 
ing for a home 

I have seen the facts of humblebees and scarlet butterflies, orioles and 
flickers, goldwing moths and pink lady-bugs— 

I have seen the spotted sunset sky filled with flights and wings— and I 
have heard high m the twilight blue the propellers of man and the 
evening air mail droning from Omaha to Chicago, droning across 
Iowa and Illinois— 

I have said The prints of many new wings, many fresh flights, many 
clean propellers, shall be on the sky before we understand God and 
the work of wings and air. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


325 


5 

I have seen the figures of heroes set up as memorials, testimonies of fact— 
Leif Ericson in a hard, deep-purple bronze, stands as a frozen shadow, 
lean, with searching eyes, on a hill m Wisconsin overlooking Lake 
Michigan— 

Columbus in bronze is the center of a turmoil of traffic from world ends 
gathered on Manhattan Island— 

Washington stands m marble shaped from life, in the old Romanesque 
temple on Capitol Hill, in Richmond, Virginia, with an arrogant 
laughter heard from circling skyscrapers— 

Andrew Jackson in bronze on a bronze horse, a rocking horse on its hind 
legs with forepaws in the air, the tail brandishing, as the General lifts 
a cockade from his head in salutation to the citizens and soldiers of 
the Republic— 

Ulysses S Grant, somber and sober, is on a pony high m bronze listening 
to the endless white horses of Lake Michigan talking to Illinois — 
Robert E Lee, recumbent in white stone, sleeps a bivouac sleep in peace 
among loved ones of the southern Shenandoah Valley— 

Lincoln's memory is kept in a living, arterial highway moving across state 
lines from coast to coast to the murmur. Be good to each other, 
sisters, don't fight, brothers 


6 

And may we ask— is a flower a fact^ 

Shall a thin perishable blossom 
Mount out of homeland soil 
And give the breath of its leaves 
For a memorial printed a few days, 

For a symbol kept by the bees and the wmd^ 

Shall each state pick its favorite flower 
And say, This is Me, Us, this comes from the dirt of the earth, the loam, 
the mulch, this is a home greeting to our eyes, these leaves touch 
our footloose feet, our children and our children's children 
The blue cornflower along the railroad tracks in Illinois— 

The pink moccasin hiding in the big woods of Minnesota — 

The wild prairie rose scrambling along Iowa roads — 

Golden poppy of California, giant cactus of Arizona — 

Apple blossom of Michigan, Kentucky's trumpet vine— 

The rhododendrons of Washington and West Virginia— 


  


524 

The Indian paintbrush of Wyoming, Montana's bitter root— * 

Vital and endless goldenrod crossing Nebraska— 

Mariposa lily of Utah, pasque flower of South Dakota- 
Ox-eyed daisy of North Carolina, Florida's orange blossom — 

The magnolia of Louisiana, the Delaware peach blossom— 

The silent laughing salutations of the Kansas sunflower— 

The old buffalo clover, the marching Texas bluebonnet— 

The pine cone and tassel of the lonesome State of Maine— 

Shall these be among our phantom facts^ 

7 

Facts are phantom, facts begin 
With a bud, a seed, an egg 

A hero, a hoodlum, a little of both, 

A toiling two-faced driven destiny. 

Sleeps in the secret traceries of eggs 

If one egg could speak and answer the question, 

Egg, who are you, what are you, where did you 
come from and where are you going? 

If one egg could break through the barriers, pass 
all interference and tell that much, then we 
could tell how the earth came— 

how we came with hair, lungs, noses 
to sit on the earth and eat our breakfasts, 
to sleep with our mates 
and to salute the moon between sleeps, 
to meditate on worms m the dust 
and how they fail to divulge the designs 
of the dark autocracies of their fates 
Let one egg tell and we would understand a billion eggs 
The newborn child, dried behind the ears. 

Swaddled m soft cloths and groping for nipples. 

Comes from a payday of love so old, 

So involved, so traced with circles of the moon. 

So cunning with secrets of the salts of blood. 

It must be older than the moon, older than the salt sea 
And do nations go back to the secret traceries of eggs? 

To beginnings that fail to divulge the designs? 

Can we say to the unborn. Egg, who are you? Egg, divulge your design 


GOOD ]SIORNING, AMERICA 


3^5 


Nations begin young the same as babies 
They suckle and struggle, they grow up, 

They toil, fight, laugh, suffer, die 
They obey the traced circles of the moon 

They follow the ordained times of night, morning, afternoon, evening, 
and night again 

They stand up and have their day on the pavilion of the Four Winds 
The night sky of stars watches them begin, wear out, and fade away be- 
fore newcomeis, before silence, before empty pavilions 
They leave flags, slogans, alphabets, numbers, tools, tales of flaming per- 
formances, they leave moths, manuscripts, memories 

And so, to the pavilion of the four winds 
Came the little one they called Amenca, 

One that suckled, struggled, toiled, laughed, grew 
America began young the same as a baby 
The little new republic had its swaddling cloths, 

Its child shirt, its tussle to knit long bone joints 
And who can read the circle of its moons now^ 

And who shall tell beforehand the secrets of its 
salts and blood? 


8 

Turn back and look at those men riding horses, sitting in saddles, smell- 
ing of leather, going to Boston, to Richmond, in velvet knicker- 
bockers, in silk stockings, in slippers with silver buckles, white- 
powdered wigs on their heads, speaking of ''the honor of a gentle- 
man,'' singing "God rest ye, merry gentlemen," meeting carpenters 
who built staircases and gables with their hands, the work-day was 
sunup till sundown, they drove handwrought nails, the smoothing of 
their own hands was on their woodwork 

Look back, they are pinching their fingers m silver and gold snuff boxes, 
lifting tankards of ale, discussing titles to many miles of land, coun- 
ties and townships of land, a gentleman rides all day to round his 
boundaries, and the jail doors cling to their brass locks holding the 
dregs, the convicts of debt 


Look back, 

And that was long ago 



326 


  


America was new bom 

The republic was a baby, a child, 

Fresh wiped behind the ears, 

Blinking, tussling to knit the long 
new bone joints 

Look back, there is an interlude, men m covered wagons, in buckskin, 
with plows, rifles, six-shooters, sweep west, the Havana cigar, the 
long pantaloons, the Mississippi steamboat, the talking wires, the 
iron horse 

Yes, there was an interlude 
Something happened, always something happens 
History is a living horse laughing at a wooden horse 
History is a wind blowing where it listeth 
History is no sure thing to bet on 
History is a box of tricks with a lost key 

History is a labyrinth of doors with sliding panels, a book of ciphers with 
the code m a cave of the Sargossa sea 
History says, if it pleases, Excuse me, I beg your pardon, it will never 
happen again if I can help it 

Yes, there was an interlude, 

And phantoms washed their white shirts 
Over and over again m buckets of blood— 

And the saddest phantom of all stood up at Gettysburg 
And tried to tell right from wrong and left the most 
of it unsaid, in the air 

The years go by with their numbers, names. 

So many born, so many gone 
Again the Four Horsemen take their laughter 
Men walk on air and tumble from the sky 

Men grapple undersea and soak their bones along rust-brown, rust-flaked 
turbines on the sea bottom 

Men bite the dust from bullets, bombs, bayonets, gas. 

Till ten million go west without time for a good-by, 

Till double ten million are cripples for life, 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


327 


Blind, shocked, broken storm children 

Boys singing Hinky Dinky Parley Voo 

Come back from the oversea vortex, 

From the barrages of No Man's Land, 

Saying with gleams deep in their eyes, 

'There is nothing to say, ask me no questions " 

9 

Steel, coal, oil, the test tube arise as facts, dominions, 

Standing establishments with world ambassadors 

Between two seashores comes a swift interweaving of blood and bones, 
nerves and arteries, rail and motor paths, airways and airports, tun- 
nels, wires, broadcasts on high and low frequencies to the receiving 
sets 

The tram callers call All Aboard for transcontinental flyers, it is seaboard 
to seaboard, and the tincan tourists buy gas and follow the bird 
migrations 

The concrete highways crack under the incessant tires of two-ton, ten-ton 
trucks—and the concrete mixers come with laughing bellies filled with 
gravel for the repair jobs 

The talk runs— of the boll-weevil in the cotton, the doodle bug in the oil 
fields, the com borer— of the lame duck in Congress, the farm bloc, 
the Ku Klux, a new sucker born every minute, sales canvass and sell- 
ing spiels — 

The talk runs— of crime waves, boy murdereis, two women and a man, 
two men and a woman, bootleggers, the beer racket and the high- 
jackers, gang fights, cloud-bursts, tornadoes, floods, the Lakes-to-Gulf 
waterway, Boulder Dam— 

The latest songs go from Broadway west across the country— the latest 
movies go from Hollywood east across the country— in a million 
homes they set their dials and listen to jazz numbers, the classics, the 
speech of the President in Washington, the heavyweight champion- 
ship fight, the symphonies of the music masters 

10 

Voices— telling mankind to look itself in the face— who are you? what 
are you? we'll tell you— here is the latest— this is what Man has done 
today on the pavilion of the four winds, on the arcs of the globe— 



  


328 


As the dusty red sun settles in the dayend the sport sheets blaze forth 
telling the box scores, the touchdowns, the scandals—pictures of 
dying champions, of new claimants, fresh aspirants calling challenges 
—of over-sea flyers, winners and losers— of new and old darlings of 
destiny— 

Fate’s crapshooters fading each othei, big Dick or snake eyes, midnights 
and deuces, chicken one day and feathers the next, the true story of 
how an ash can became a verandah and vice versa 

11 

A code arnves, language, lingo, slang, 
behold the proverbs of a people, a nation 
Give ’em the works Fix it, there’s always 
a way Be hard boiled The good die young 

Be a square shooter Be good, if you can’t 
be good be careful When they put you in 
that SIX foot bungalow, that wooden kimono, 
you’re through and that’s that 

Sell ’em, sell ’em Make ’em eat it What 
if we gyp ’em? It’ll be good for ’em Get their 
names on the dotted line and give ’em the haha 

The higher they go the farther they drop 
The fewer the sooner Tell ’em Tell ’em 
Make ’em listen They got to listen when 
they know who you are Don’t let ’em know 
what you got on your hip Hit ’em where 
they ain’t It’s good for whatever ails 
you and if nothing ails you it’s good for 
that. Where was you raised— in a barn? 

They’re a lot of muckers, tm horns, show 
those slobs where they get off at Tell ’em 
you’re going to open a keg of nails Beat ’em 
to a fare-thee-well Hand ’em the razz-berries 
Clean ’em and then give ’em carfare home 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


329 


Maybe all you'll get from 'em you can put in 
your ear, anyhow 

They got a fat nerve to try to tie a can 
on 5'Ou Send 'em to the cleaners Put the 
kibosh on 'em so they'll never come back 
You don't seem to know four out of five 
have pyorrhea in Peoria 

Your head ain't screwed on wrong, I trust 
Use your noodle, your nut, your think tank, 
your skypiece God meant for you to use it 
If they offer to let you in on the ground 
floor take the elevator 

Put up a sign Don't worry, it won't last, 
nothing does Put up a sign In God we 
trust, all others pay cash Put up a sign 
Be brief, we have our living to make Put 
up a sign Keep off the grass 

Aye, behold the proverbs of a people 
The big word is Service 
Service-first, last and always 
Business is business 

What you don't know won't hurt you 

Courtesy pays 

Fair enough 

The voice with a smile 

Say it with flowers 

Let one hand wash the other 

The customer is always right 

Who's your boy friend? 

Who's your girl friend? 

O very well 

God reigns and the government at Washington lives 
Let it go at that 

There are lies, dam lies and statistics 
Figures don't he but liars can figure 
There's more truth than poetry in that 
You don't know the half of it, dearie 



330 


  


It's the roving bee that gathers the honey ^ 

A big man is a big man 'whether he's a president or a prizefighter ^ 

Name your poison 

Take a little interest 

Look the part 

It pays to look well 

Be yourself 

Speak softly and carry a big stick ® 

War IS hell 

Honesty is the best policy. 

It's all m the way you look at it 

Get the money— honestly if you can 

It's hell to be poor 

Well, money isn’t everything 

Well, life is what you make it 

Speed and curves— what more do you want^ 

I’d rather fly than eat ^ 

There must be pioneers and some of them get killed ^ 

The grass is longer in the backyard ® 

Give me enough Swedes and snuff and I’ll build a railroad to hell ® 
How much did he leave? All of it^ 

Can you unscramble eggs? ® 

Early to bed and early to rise and you never meet any prominent people ® 
Let's go Watch our smoke Excuse our dust 
Keep your shirt on 


12 

First come the pioneers, lean, hungry, fierce, dirty 
They wrangle and battle with the elements 

^On hearing from his father ''A rolling stone gathers no moss,” John L Sullivan 
won one of his important early fights and telegraphed this reply 

s John L Sullivan's greeting spoken to President Theodore Roosevelt in the White 
House 

3 A Spanish proverb first Americanized by Theodore Roosevelt 
^Charles A Lindbergh 

5 Based on a Republican campaign story in 1892 alleging that a man on all fours 
eating grass on the White House lawn told President Grover Cleveland, 'Tm hungry,” 
and was advised, “The grass is longer in the backyard ” 

3 A saying that took nse from James J (Jim) Hill 

^ A folk tale in Chicago chronicles two ditch diggers on the morning after Marshall 
Field I died, leaving an estate of $150000,000, as having this dialogue 

3 J Pierpont Morgan's query as to court decrees dissolving an inevitable industrial 
combination 
® George Ade 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


331 


They gamble on crops, chills, ague, rheumatism 
They fight wars and put a nation on the map 
They battle with blizzards, lice, wolves 
They go on a fighting trail 
To break sod for unnumbered millions to come 

Then the fat years arrive when the fat drips 
Then come the rich men baffled by their riches. 

Bewildered by the silence of their tall possessions 
Then come the criers of the ancient desperate taunt 
Stuff your guts 
and strut your stuff, 
strut it high and handsome, 
when you die you're dead 
and there's no comeback 
and not even the winds 
will say your name- 
feed, oh pigs, feed, oh swine 

Old timer, dust of the eaith so kindly, 

Old timer, dirt of our feet and days 
Old time gravel and gumbo of the earth. 

Take them back kindly. 

These pigs, these swine 

The bones of them and their brothers blanch to the same yellow of the 
years 

13 

Since we sell the earth with a fence around it. 

Since one man sells the ocean to another and guarantees a new roof and 
all modern conveniences, 

Since we sell everything but the blue sky and only the Blue Sky Laws 
stop us selling that. 

Since we sell justice, since we sell pardons for crimes. 

Since we sell land titles, oil claims, ninety-nine year options, all-day 
suckers and two-minute eggs— 

Since we have coined a slogan. Never give the sucker an even break and 
the Old Army Game goes— 

Since the selling game is the big game and unless you know how to sell 
you're a bum and that ain't all— 


332 


  


Since the city hicks and the hicks from the sticks go to the latest Broad- 
way hit hoping to fix their glims on a birdie with her last feather off 
in a bathtub of booze— 

Let the dance go on— let the stalking stuffed cadavers of old men run the 
earth and call up the Four Horsemen 

14 

Now it's Uncle Sam sitting on top of the world 

Not so long ago it was John Bull and, earlier yet, Napoleon and the 
eagles of France told the world where to get off at 

Spam, Rome, Greece, Persia, then blunderbuss guns, their spears, cata- 
pults, ships, took their turn at leading the civilizations of the earth— 

One by one they were bumped off, moved over, left behind, taken for 
a ride, they died or they lost the wallop they used to pack, not so 
good, not so good 

One by one they no longer sat on top of the world— now the Young 
Stranger is Uncle Sam, is Amenca and the song goes, “The stars and 
stripes forever even though “forever" is a long time 

Even though the oldest kings had their singers and clowns calling, “Oh 
king, you shall live forever” 


15 

In God we trust, it is so wntten 
The writing goes onto every silver dollar 
The fact God is the great One who made us all 
We IS you and me and all of us m the United States of Amenca 
And trusting God means we give ourselves, all of ourselves, the whole 
United States of America, to God, the great One 
Yes perhaps is that so^ 


16 

The silent litany of the workmen goes on— 
Speed, speed, we are the makers of speed 
We make the flying, crying motors. 
Clutches, brakes, and axles. 

Gears, ignitions, accelerators. 

Spokes and spnngs and shock absorbers 
The silent litany of the workmen goes on— 
Speed, speed, we are the makers of speed, 
Axles, clutches, levers, shovels, 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


333 


We make the signals and lay the way— 

Speed, speed 

The trees come down to our tools 
We carve the wood to the wanted shape 
The whining propeller's song m the sky, 

The steady drone of the overland truck, 

Comes from our hands, us, the makers of speed 

Speed, the turbines crossing the Big Pond, 

Every nut and bolt, every bar and screw, 

Every fitted and whirling shaft, 

They came from us, the makers. 

Us, who know how. 

Us, the high designers and the automatic feeders. 

Us, with heads. 

Us, with hands, 

Us, on the long haul, the short flight. 

We are the makers, lay the blame on us— 

The makers of speed 

17 

There is a Sleepwalker 
goes walking and talking— 

I promise you nothing, there are too many promises 
I bring you a package so little, so thin, you can hide it anywhere, in your 
shoes, m your ear, in a corner of your heart 
I bring you a handkerchief, so filmy a gauze of silk, so foamy a fabric, 
you pick it up and put it away as you put away a bubble, a morning 
cobweb in the sun, a patch of moon dropped from two lilacs 
I bring you gold, beaten so thin with so many little hammers it is thinner 
than the morning laughter of hummingbirds flitting among diamond 
dewdrops yet hard as an anvil wearing out the strongest hammers 

There is a Sleepwalker 
goes walking and talking— 

Go alone and away from all books, go with your own heart into the 
storm of human hearts and see if somewheie in that storm there are 
bleeding hearts, sacred hearts taking a bitter wages of doom, red- 
soaked and crimson-plunged hearts of the Redeemer of Man 


334 


  


Walk by yourself and find the silence where a whisper of your lips is the 
same as a pounding and a shouting at the knobs and panels of great 
doors 

Walk again where the mass human shadows foregather, where the silhou- 
ettes and pantomimes of the great human procession wind with a 
crying out loud, and rotten laughters mix with raging tumults— 
And between the being born and the being dead of the generations they 
march, march, march, to the drums, drums, drums, of the three facts 
of arriving, living, departing— 

Go where the shadows string from winding pilgrim cohorts, where the 
line of the march twists and reels, and a hundred years is nothing 
much and a thousand or a million years nothing much, as they march, 
march, march, to the drums, drums, drums, of the three facts 
Go there and let your heart be soft, fading as rainbows on slants of ram 
in the sun let your heart be full of riddles as while steel and its blue 
shadows 

There is a sleepwalker 
goes walking and talking— 

We are afraid What are we afraid of^ 

We are afraid of what we are afraid of 
We are afraid of this, that, these, those, them 
We are afraid the earth will blow up and bomb the human family out 
of its sleep, its slumber, its sleepwalking, its pass and repass of 
shadows 

We are afraid the sky will come apart and fall on us and in a ram of 
stars we will wash out into the Great Alone, the Deep Dark, saying, 
''Good-by old Mother Earth, we always were afraid of you 
We are afraid, what are we afraid oP We are afraid of nothing much, 
nothing at all, nothing in the shape of god, man or beast, we can 
eat any ashes offered us, we can step out before the fact of the Fact 
of Death and look it in the eye and laugh, "You are the beginning 
or the end of something, Fll gamble with you. Til take a chance '' 

i8 

And we, us, the people. 

We who of course are no sleepwalkers, 

Perhaps we may murmur— 



GOOD MORNINGy AMERICA 


335 


Perhaps as the airmen slip into their leather coats. 

Gambling for the timetables as against the skull and crossbones, 

Riding with mail sacks across orange blossoms, the desert cactus, the 
Rockies, the Great Plains, the Mississippi, the corn belt, the Appa 
lachians, 

Riding with mail sacks, with a clutch on the steering wheels in storms 
and stars, with a passing cry, ''Good luck and God bless you,'" 
Perhaps while they ride and gamble on the new transcontinental sky 
paths, perhaps we may ask and murmur— 

Good morning, America 
Good morning, Mr Who, Which, What 
Good morning, let's all of us tell our 
real names 

Good morning, Mr Somebody, Nobody, Any- 
body-who-is-Anybody-at-all 
Good morning. Worms in the Dust, Eagles 
in the Air, Climbers to the Top of 
the Sky 

You have kissed good-by to one century, one little priceless album 
You will yet kiss good-by to ten, twenty centuries Ah* you shall have 
such albums* 

Your mothers, America, have labored and carried harvests of generations— 
Across the spillways come further harvests, new tumultuous populations, 
young strangers, crying, "We are here* We belong* look at us*" 
Good morning, America* 

Morning goes as morning-glories go* 

High noon goes, afternoon goes* 

Twilight, sundown, gloaming— 

The hour of writing Good night, America* 

Good night, sleep, peace, and sweet dreams* 

20 

The prints of many new ships shall be on the sky 
The Four Horsemen shall ride again in a bitter dust, 

The granaries of great nations shall be the food of fat rats. 

And the shooting stars shall write new alphabets on the sky 
Before we come home. 

Before we understand 



336   

Off in our western sky, 

Off in a burning maroon, 

Shall come in a wintnsh haze. 

Shall come in points and crystals— 

A shovel of stars 

Let us wigwag the moon 
Let us make new propellers. 

Go past old spent stars 

And find blue moons on a new star path 

Let us make pioneer prayers 

Let working clothes be sacred 

Let us look on 

And listen in 

On God's great workshop 

Of stars and eggs 

There shall be— 

Many many girls in a wild windy moonlight. 

Many many mothers carrying babies 

21 

Sea sunsets, give us keepsakes 
Frame gloamings, pay us for prayers 
Mountain clouds on bronze skies— 

Give us great memories 
Let us have summer roses 
Let us have tawny harvest haze in pumpkin time 
Let us have springtime faces to toil for and play for 
Let us have the fun of booming winds on long waters 
Give us dreamy blue twilights— of winter evenings— to wrap us m a coat 
of dreaminess 

Moonhght, come down— shine down, moonlight— meet every bird cry 
and every song calling to a hard old earth, a sweet young earth 



337 


Spring Grass 


SPRING GRASS 

Spring grass, there is a dance to be danced 
for you 

Come up, spring grass, if only for young feet 
Come up, spring grass, young feet ask you 

Smell of the young spring grass, 

You're a mascot riding on the wind horses 
You came to my nose and spiffed me This is 
your lucky year 

Young spring grass just after the winter, 
Shoots of the big green whisper of the year. 
Come up, if only for young feet 
Come up, young feet ask you 


MOIST MOON PEOPLE 

The moon is able to command the valley tonight 
The green mist shall go a-roaming, the white river shall 
go a-roammg 

Yet the moon shall be commanding, the moon shall take a 
high stand on the sky 
When the cats crept up the gullies. 

And the goats fed at the rim a-laughing. 

When the spiders swept their rooms in the burr oaks. 

And the katydids first searched for this year s accordions. 
And the crickets began adooking for last year's concer- 
tinas— 



338 


  


I was there, I saw that hour, I know God had grand 
intentions about it 

If not, why did the moon command the valley, the green 
mist and white river go a-roaming, and the moon by 
itself take so high a stand on the sky? 

If God and I alone saw it, the show was worth putting on. 

Yet I remember others were there, Amos and Priscilla, 

Axel and Hulda, Hank and Jo, Big Charley and 
Little Mornmgstar, 

They were all there, the clock ticks spoke with castanet 
clicks 


SPRING CRIES 

1 

Call us back, call us with your sliding silver. 

Frogs of the early spring, frogs of the later days 
When spring crosses over, when spring spills over 
And spills the last of its sliding silvers 
Into the running wind, the running water, of summer 
Call us back then, call over, call under— only call — 
Frogs of the early spring, frogs of the later days 

2 

Birds we have seen and known and counted, 

Birds we have never learned the names of. 

Call us back, you too, call us back 
Out of the forks and angles of branches, 

High out of the blacksmith arms of oak and ash. 
Sweet out of the Lombardy poplar's arrow head, 

Soft out of the swinging, swaying, 

The bending and almost broken branch 
Of the bush of the home of the wild gooseberry— 
Yellow feather, white throat, gray neck, red wing. 
Scarlet head, blue shoulder, copper silver body line— 
All you birds— call us back— call us under, over— 
Birds we know, birds we never can know, 

Birds spilling your one-two-three 
Of a slur and a cry and a trill— 

Call us back, you too call us. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


339 


3 

Warble us easy and old ones 

Open your gates up the sunset m the evening 

Lift up your windows of song in the morning lights 

Wind on your spiral and zigzag ways 

Birds, we have heard baskets of you, bushes of you 

In a tree of a hundred windows ten of you sat 

On the song sills of every window 

Warble us easy and old ones now 

Call us back, spill your one-two-three 

Of a slur and a cry and a trill 


FROG SONGS 

The silver burbles of the frogs wind and swirl 

The lines of their prongs swing up in a spray 

They cut the air with bird line curves 

The eye sees nothing, the ear is filled, the head remembers 

The beat of the swirl of frog throat silver prongs 

In the early springtime when eggs open, when feet learn. 

When the crying of the water begins a new year 


LUMBER YARD POOLS AT SUNSET 

The ram pools in the old lumber yard 
change as the sky changes 

No sooner do lightfoot sunset maroons 
cross the west than they cross the ram 
pools too 

So now every blue has a brother 
and every singing silver a sister 


SPRING CARRIES SURPRISES 
Be gay now 

Shadows go fast these days 
Unlocking the locks of blossoms 


340 


  


The lilacs never know how, 

The oleanders along the old walls, 

The peach trees over the hills— 

Out of the lock-ups they go, 

Out and crying with leaves 
They never know how 
Be gay— this is the time 

The little keys of the climbing runners, 
The opening of the doors again, 

The letting loose of the shut-ms— 

Here is the time— be gay now 

Ask spring why 

Ask in your heart why 

Go around gay and foolish asking why 

God be easy on your fool heart 

If you don't go around asking spring 

In your heart, ''Why, why, why," 

Three times like that, or else 
One long, "Why?" 

Be gay now 


MORE COUNTRY PEOPLE 

The six pigs at the breast of their mother 

Equal six spots of young brown against a big spot of old brown 

The bleating of the sheep was an arithmetic 

Of the long wool coats thick after winter 

The collar of white hair hung on the neck of the black hog, 

The roosters of the Buff Cochin people strutted 

Cherry blanches stuck their blossoms against the sky 
Elbows joined elbows of white blossoms 
Zigzags blent into a mass 

"Look once at us— today is the day we call today " 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


34 ^ 


SPRING WIND 

Be flip with us if you want to, spring wind. 

Be gay and make us sniff at your slow secrets 
Be easy with us, spring wind 
Be lovely and yet be lovely not too fast with us 

If a child came crying out of a snowstorm 
And sat down with seciets of new playthings, 

Crying because lovelier things than ever came that year— 

If a child came crying out of sheet ice, 

A white carving of a lithe running torso. 

Holding in its hands new baffling playthings— 

If a child came crying so. 

Wet and smiling, smelling of promises 
Of yellow roses blowing in the river backwashes, 

Potato blossoms across the prairie flat lands, 

And even so much as one new honest song to sing — 

If a child came so, 

We would say, 'Come and sit on our back porch, 

Listen with us and tell us more, tell us all you know. 
Tell us the secrets of the spring wind, 

Tell us if this is a lucky year, 

Be lovely and yet be lovely not too fast with us ' 


CRISSCROSS 

Spring crosses over into summer 
This IS as it always was 

Buds on the redhaw, beetles in the loam. 
And the interference of the green leaves 
At the blue roofs of the spring sky 
Crossing over into summer— 

These are ways, this is out and on 
This always was 



  


S42 


The tumble out and the push up, 

The breaking of the little doors, 

The look again at the mother sun, 

The feel of the blue roofs over— 

This is summer? This always was? 

The whispering sprigs of buds stay put 

The spiders are after the beetles 

The farmer is driving a tractor turning furrows 

The hired man drives a manure spreader 

The oven bird hops in dry leaves 

The woodpecker beats his tattoo 

Is this it? Is spring crossing over? 

Is it summer? And this always was? 

The whispering pinks, the buds on the redhaw, 
The blue roofs of the sky stay put 


BABY SONG OF THE FOUR WINDS 

Let me be your baby, south wind 
Rock me, let me rock, rock me now 
Rock me low, rock me warm 
Let me be your baby 

Comb my hair, west wind 
Comb me with a cowlick 
Or let me go with a pompadour. 

Come on, west wind, make me your baby 

North wind, shake me where Fm foolish 
Shake me loose and change my ways 
Cool my ears with a blue sea wind 
Fm your baby, make me behave 

And you, east wind, what can I ask? 

A fog comfort? A fog to tuck me in? 

Fix me so and let me sleep 
Fm your baby— and I always was 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


343 


BLOSSOM THEMES 
1 

Late in the winter came one day 
When there was a whiff on the wind, 
a suspicion, a cry not to be heard 

of perhaps blossoms, perhaps green 
grass and clean hills lifting roll- 
ing shoulders 

Does the nose get the cry of spring 
first of alP is the nose thankful 
and thrilled first of all? 

2 

If the blossoms come down 

so they must fall on snow 

because spring comes this year 

before winter is gone, 

then both snow and blossoms look sad, 

peaches, cherries, the red summer apples, 

all say it is a hard year 

The wind has its own way of picking off 

the smell of peach blossoms and then 

carrying that smell miles and miles 

Women washing dishes in lonely farmhouses 
stand at the door and say, ''Something is 
happening '' 

A little foam of the summer sea 
of blossoms, 

a foam finger of white leaves, 
shut these away— 
high into the summer wind runners 
Let the wind be white too 


344 


  


SMALL HOMES 

The green bug sleeps in the white lily ear 
The red bug sleeps in the white magnolia 
Shiny wings, you are choosers of color 
You have taken your summer bungalows wisely 


SHE OPENS THE BARN DOOR EVERY MORNING 

Open the barn door, farm woman, 

It IS time for the cows to be milked 

Their udders are full from the sleep night 

Open the door with your right hand shuttling a cleat, 

Your left hand pulling a handle 

The smell of the bam is let out to the pastures 

Dawn lets itself in at the open door 

A cow left out in the barnyard all the night 

Looks on as though you do this every mo rning 

Open the bam door, farm woman, you do it 

As you have done it five hundred times 

As a sleep woman heavy with the earth. 

Clean as a milk pail washed in the sun. 

You open the bam door a half mile away 
And a cow almost turns its head and looks on. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


345 


MILK-WHITE MOON, PUT THE COWS TO SLEEP 

Milk-white moon, put the cows to sleep 
Since five o'clock in the morning. 

Since they stood up out of the grass. 

Where they slept on their knees and hocks. 

They have eaten grass and given their milk 
And eaten grass again and given milk, 

And kept their heads and teeth at the earth's face 
Now they are looking at you, milk-white moon 
Carelessly as they look at the level landscapes, 
Carelessly as they look at a pail of new white milk, 
They are looking at you, wondering not at all, at all. 
If the moon is the skim face top of a pail of milk, 
Wondering not at all, carelessly looking 
Put the cows to sleep, milk-white moon, 

Put the cows to sleep 


SLOW PROGRAM 

The iron lails run into the sun 

The setting of the sun chooses an hour 

The red rail ribbons run into the red ball sun. 

The ribbons and the ball change like red water lights 
The picture floats with a slow program of red haze lights 


FIELD PEOPLE 

In the morning eyes of the brown-eyed Susans, 
m the toadflax sheaves smiling butter-and-eggs, 
m the white mushrooms sprung from air into air 
since yesterday morning, since yesterday evening, 
m the corn row corridor walls of cornstalks— 
the same southwest wind comes again, knowing— 

How the field people go away, 
the corn row people, the toadflax, mushroom, 
thistlebloom people. 




  


346 


how they nse, sing songs they learn, and then go away, 
leaving in the air no last will and testament at all, 
leaving no last whisper at all on how this sister, 
that brother, this friend, such and such a sweetheart 
is remembered with a gold leaf, a cup rainbow home, 
a cricket’s hut for counting its summer heartbeats, 
a caught shimmer of one haunted moonray to be passed on— 
the running southwest wind knows them all 


SUNSETS 

There are sunsets who whisper a good-by 
It IS a short dusk and a way for stars 
Frame and sea rim they go level and even 
And the sleep is easy 

'There are sunsets who dance good-by. 
They fling scarves half to the arc. 

To the arc then and over the arc 
Ribbons at the ears, sashes at the hips. 
Dancing, dancing good-by And here sleep 
Tosses a little with dreams 


GRASSROOTS 

Grass clutches at the dark dirt with finger holds 
Let it be blue grass, barley, rye or wheat. 

Let it be button weed or butter-and-eggs. 

Let it be Johnny-jump-ups spnnging clean blue streaks 
Grassroots down under put fingers into dark dirt 


CANADIANS AND POTTAWATOMIES 

I HAVE seen a loneliness sit 
in the dark and nothing lit up 
I have seen a loneliness sit 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


347 


in the dark lit up like a Christ- 
mas tree, a Hallowe'en pumpkin 

If two Canadians understand snow 
they are then both Canadians 
If one Canadian understands snow 
and another doesn't understand 
snow at all, then one is a Canadian 
and the other is no Canadian at all 

The Pottawatomie Indians sang something 
like this in their early winter songs. 

They sang it digging holes in the ice to 
let down fish-hooks, they chattered it in 
the wigwams when blizzards shook the wigwams 


CORN AND BEANS 

Having looked long at two gardens rows 

And seen how the ram and dirt have used them 

I have decided the corn and beans shall have names 

And one is to be known as the Thwarted Corn of a Short Year 
While the other shall be called the Triumphant Beans of Plenty Ram 

If I change these names next Sunday I shall let you know about it 


MOCKERS GO TO KANSAS IN SPRING 

Riding from Topeka, Kansas, to Manhattan, Kansas, 

Marco saw and heard three mockingbirds 
He mentioned it to the Kansas Authors' Club 
Two mockers were heard that night in Manhattan 
A man from Chicago sleeping m the Gillett Plouse 
Heard one of the mockers before breakfast the morning after 
This is evidence, testimony, offered in behalf of those who do not under- 
stand how mockers roam north from Texas and Arkansas, sometimes 
as far north as Manhattan, Kansas 



348 


  


BIRD TALK 

And now when the branches were beginning to be heavy, 

It was the time when they once had said, 'This is the 
beginning of summer” 

The shrilling of the frogs was not so shrill as in the 
first weeks after the broken winter, 

The birds took their hops and zigzags a little more 
anxious, a home is a home, worms are worms 
The yellow spreads of the dandelions and buttercups 
reached across the green pastures 
Tee whee and tee whee came on the breezes, and the grackles 
chuzzled their syllables 

And it was the leaves with a strong soft wind over them 
that talked most of all and said more than any others 
though speaking the fewest words 
It was the green leaves trickling out the gaunt nowhere 
of winter, out on the gray hungry branches— 

It was the leaves on the branches, beginning to be heavy, 
who said as they said one time before, "This is the be- 
ginning of summer ” 

We shall never blame the birds who come 

where the river and the road make the Grand Crossing 
and talk there, sitting in circles talking bird talk 
If they ask in their circles as to who is here 

and as to who is not here and who used to be here, 

Or if instead of counting up last year as against 

this year, they count up this year as against next 
year, and have their bird chatter about who is here 
this year who won't be here next year. 

We shall never blame the birds 

If I have put your face among leaf faces, child. 

Or if I have put your voice among bird voices, 

Blame me no more than the bluejays 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


349 


KANSAS LESSONS 

Often the mockingbird is only a mocker 
singing the songs of other birds, 
pouring their trills over the bushes 

And sometimes the mocker is all alone 
the child playing all-aloney all—aloney 
And sometimes the mocker calls, calls, calls, 
die fables, texts and cries of all heartbreaks, 
all the wild nights a blood-gold moon can buy 


CRICKET MARCH 

As the corn becomes higher 

The one shrill of a summer cricket 

Becomes two and ten 

With a shrilling surer than last month 

As the banners of the com 

Come to their highest flying in the wind. 

The summer crickets come to a marching army 


SUMMER GRASS 

Summer grass aches and whispers 

It wants something, it calls and sings, it pours 
out wishes to the overhead stars 

The ram hears, the ram answers, the ram is slow 
coming, the ram wets the face of the grass. 


NOCTURN CABBAGE 

Cabbages catch at the moon 
It IS late summer, no ram, the pack of the soil 
cracks open, it is a hard summer 



350 


  


In the night the cabbages catch at the moon, the 
leaves drip silver, the rows of cabbages are 
senes of little silver waterfalls in the moon 


CRABAPPLES 

Sweeten these bitter wild crabapples, Illinois 
October sun The roots here came from the 
wilderness, came before man came here They 
are bitter as the wild is bitter 

Give these crabapples your softening gold, 
October sun, go through to the white wet 
seeds inside and soften them black Make 
these bitter apples sweet They want you, sun 

The drop and the fall, the drop and the fall, 
the apples leaving the branches for the black 
earth under, they know you from last year, 
the year before last year, October sun 


POPLAR AND ELM 

Silver leaves of the last of summer. 

Poplar and elm sih^er leaves. 

Leaves not least of all of the Lombardy poplar, 

Standing before the autumn moon and the autumn wind 
as a woman waits in a doorway for some one who 
must be coming. 

All you silver leaf people, you I have seen and heard 
in a hundred summer winds, 

It IS October, it is a week, two weeks, till the ram and frost 
break on us and the leaves are washed off, washed 
down 

In January when the trees fork gray against a clear winter 
blue in the spare sun silver of winter or the lengthened 
frost silver of the long nights— 

I shall remember then the loans of the sun to you in June, 
I shall remember the hundred winds who kissed you 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


35^ 


BROWN GOLD 

The time of the brown gold comes softly 

Oat shocks are alive in brown gold belts, 
the short and the shambling oat shocks 
sit on the stubble and straw 

The timothy hay, the fodder corn, the cabbage 
and the potatoes, across their leaves are 
footsteps 

There is a bold green up over the cracks in 
the corn rows where the crickets go criss- 
cross errands, where the bugs carry pack- 
ages 

Flutter and whirr, you birdies, you newcomers 
m lines and sashes, tellers of harvest 
weather on the way, belts of brown gold 
coming softly 

It IS very well the old time streamers take 

up the old time gold haze against the west- 
ern timber line 

It is the old time again when months and birds 
tell each other, ''Oh, very well,’’ and repeat it 
where the fields and the timber lines meet 
in belts of brown gold hazes, "Oh, very 
well, Oh, very well ” 


RIPE CORN 

The wind blows The corn leans The corn leaves go rustling The march 
time and the wmdbeat is on October drums The stalks of fodder bend 
all one way, the way the last windstorm passed 

"Put on my winter clothes, get me an ulster, a yellow ulster to lay down 
m January and shut my eyes and cover my ears in snow drifts ” 

The wind blows The corn leans The fodder is russet October says to the 
leaves, "Rustle now to the last lap, to the last leg of the year ” 



352 


  


AUBURN 

Auburn autumn leaves, will } ou come back? 

Auburn autumn oaks, foxpnnts burning soft, 
burning the oaken autumn coats, burning 
the auburn autumn fire— 

How can you burn so, how can you go on with 
all this burning, and bring back more to 
burn next year? 

Ask and let go, lift this burning of this year 
so much like last year's burning, let next 
year s burning come, ask, let go 
The burnings of the auburn autumn leaves, the 
slow burnt foxpnnts of the oaken auburns, 
house of leaves and branches, house of leaves 
to burn and branches to be here in the 
white howling, the white quiet of winter— 

Going so, going so, auburn house-roof of eaves and 
leaves, the child and the old man, the child and 
the old woman shoot a good-by to you 

The tall old man with clean bones, clean-shape toes 
counting ten against the bed footboard— 

This is the tall old man telling a son with clean 
bones a passover auburn and oaken secret— 

There are fall leaves, foxprmt burnings, this year, 
last year, next year, in all houses, and 
Most of all in the house of the tall old man with 
clean bones, clean-shape toes counting ten against 
the bed footboard 

In all houses are leaves burnt and burning, in all hous- 
es branches to be here in the white howling, the patched 
black quiet of winter 


REDHAW RAIN 

The red ram spatter under the redhaw 
tree, the hut roof branches of the red- 
haw tree, the floor level loam under the 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


353 


redhaw tree, the meeting place of the 
fall red ram and the loam of the first 
fall frost—the Pottawatomies took this 
into their understanding of why October 
SO seldom fails, why October so often 
brings the red ram spatter under the red- 
haw tree 

The slow ram soaks The farmers fix 
wagon axles, patch the bam roof shin- 
gles, peek in the thatch of the empty 
swallow homes The farm wives keep to 
the kitchens cleaning pans The slow 
ram soaks 

The head at the end of a horse's neck 
holds its bone and meat, teeth and eye- 
balls, tongue and ears, to the west, to 
the east, to the browse of the last of 
the sweetgrass range this year Snow 
comes soon, out of the north, to the south 
and south The tongue of the head in 
the sweetgrass knows 

The gray west opens for a spear of blue 
longer than fifty, a hundred and fifty, 
prairie miles 

The gray west opens a triangle silver, 
an arch of bar clouds over the prairie 

And the sun washes the spear, the arch, 
the triangle, over and over 


WITHOUT NOTICE BEFOREHAND 

The frozen ram of the first November days 
came down without notice beforehand 
the same as the wind and the frost 
loosening the leaves of the buckeye tree, 
dropping a yellow ram of flat swirling leaves, 
all without notice beforehand, came down. 



554 


  


the same as the far hiding out of lady bugs, 
woggle bugs spotted black polka dots 
on box car red, on banana yellow, 
the same as this going away of the bug families 
all went on without notice beforehand 

Under the hedgethorn tree the bugs got together, 
families from many directions, they dappled 
the dark soil and made a red weather 
of the Indian summer afternoon among thorns, 
if a man should live a day for every bug 
with a paint of box car red, a lamp shade red 
on his back, a man would live many years 
counting a day for a bug under the Indian summer 
hedgethorn afternoon, the farmers husked their 
corn m old fashioned Studebaker wagons, 
the cream and gold corn ears sent a shine 
between tire green wagon boards, over the tops 
of the green wagon boards, so the bug families 
held a pow wow, making a red weather 
among thorns in sun patches of Indian summer, 
it seemed to be all m a bug family lifetime 
coming as it did with no warnings ahead, 
no shadow line to tell how soon or late 
the frozen ram of the first November days, 
coming without notice beforehand 

The buckeye built itself a house of gold and black, 
the green leaf roof, the green leaf walls of summei 
belted their eaves with bucklers of gold, 
changed their arches and let the rich glooms 
of the black inside rafters play out, 
the shine was loam crossing its heart with gold, 
the running out of russet and cream yellow 
on the loam black of the forks of the branches 
was a sign of summer people leaving 
the house the buckeye built itself, and this too 
came with no warnings ahead, no shadow line 
of the frozen ram of the first November days 
coming without notice beforehand 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


355 


CORN PRATTLINGS 

The wind came across the corn laughing 
It was late in summer, the limit of summer, 

The deadline of early fall time. 

And the wind in the laughing corn, 

The wind came across 

The wind ran on the tops of the corntassels, 

And the pointed long leaves hung over. 

Hands obedient to the wind 
And the wind ran once and again for each leaf, 
Each pointed long leaf, the wind sang running 
Across the corntassels and leaves of corn 

There is a floor the corn grows on, 

The roots of the com go under and twist and hold 
The trunk of the corn stands over the floor. 

The leaf and the corntassel signal our \\ mds 
And take notice of the path of the sun 

The ears laugh in the husks now 
The big ]ob of the year is done 
It's all over again till next year 
Out of maroon silk and fading greens. 

Up over the wandering pumpkin stems, 

The yellow and gold kernels laugh 
The big ]ob is over and the laugh of the yellow ears 
And the laugh of the running wind go together 
They come across together now late, late, in summer 
Early in the fall time of the corntassels 


HAZE GOLD 

Sun, you may send your haze gold 
Filling the fall afternoon 
With a flimmer of many gold feathers 
Leaves, you may linger in the fall sunset 



356 


  


Like late lingering butterflies before frost 
Treetops, you may sift the sunset cross-lights 
Spreading a loose checkerworlc of gold and shadow 
Winter comes soon— shall we save this, lay it by, 
Keep all we can of these haze gold yellows^ 


WINTER GOLD 

The same gold of summer was on the winter hills, 
the oat straw gold, the gold of slow sun change 

The stubble was chilly and lonesome, 
the stub feet clomb up the hills and stood 

The flat cry of one wheeling crow faded and came, 
ran on the stub gold flats and faded and came 

Fade-me, find-me, slow lights rang their changes 
on the flats of oat straw gold on winter hills 


MAROON WITH SILVER FROST 

Whispers of maroon came on the little river. 
The slashed hill took up the sunset, 

Took up the evening star 
The brambles crackled in a fire call 
To the beginnings of frost 
'It IS almost night,” the maroon whispered 
in widening blood rings on the little river 
"It is night,” the sunset, the evening star 

said later over the hump of the slashed hill 
"What if it is^” the brambles crackled across 
the sure silver beginnings of frost 


CORNFIELD RIDGE AND STREAM 

The top of the ndge is a cornfield 

It rests all winter under snow 

It feeds the broken snowdrifts in spring 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


357 


To a clear stream cutting down hill to the river 
Late in summer the stream dries, rabbits run and 
birds hop along the dry mud bottom 
Fall time comes and it fills with leaves, oaks and 
shagbark hickories drop their summer hats, 
nbbons, handkerchiefs 

^This is how I keep warm all winter,"' the stream 
murmurs, waiting till the snowdrifts melt and 
the ice loosens and the clear singing babble 
of spring comes back 


ON A RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY 

Stream, go hide yourself 
In the tall grass, in the cat-tails. 

In the browns of autumn, the last purple 
asters, the yellow whispers 
On the moss rock levels leave the marks 
of your wave-lengths 
Sing m your gravel, m your clean gully 
Let the moaning railroad trains go by. 
Till they stop you, go on with your song 

The minnies spin in the water gravel. 

In the spears of the early autumn sun. 
There must be winter fish 
Babies, you will be jumping fish 
In the first snow month 


SO TO SPEAK 

Dreams, graves, pools, growing 
flowers, cornfields—these are 
silent, so to speak 

Northwest blizzards, sea rocks 
apounding in high wind, southeast 
sleet after a thaw— these are heard, 
so to speak 


SILVER POINT 


The silver point of an evening star 
dropping toward the hammock of new moon 
over Lake Okoboji, over praine waters in Iowa,— 
it was framed in the lights just after twilight 


MIST MARCHES ACROSS THE VALLEY 

Mist marches across the valley 

Down a long slope the mist marches 

And then up a long slope the mist marches 

And kingdoms, armies, guns, magic of bookmen, axmen. 

The mist marches through them all, gathers them all 
And goes to the next valley, goes to the next night. 

Goes to the next lookers-on, pthers them all. 

Gathers valleys, nights, lookers-on 

Come on down the valley come on, oh mist 
Whiten us with some of your white 
Show us your gift, your great gift, your white gift 
Of gathenng all, gathenng kingdoms, armies, guns. 

Magic of bookmen, axmen, gathenng valleys, nights, lookers-on 
Whiten us, oh mist, whiten us with some of this strong soft white of 
yours 


METHUSALEH SAW MANY REPEATERS 

Methusaleh was a witness to many cabbages and kings, 

Many widows of the sod and many grass widows. 

Many a mother-m-law, many a triangle of one woman and two men or 
one man and two women. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


359 


Many who died hungry and crying for their babies, many who died 
hungry and no babies at all to cry for 

Methusaleh must have lived eight hundred years or a thousand or two 
hundred years 

Methusaleh was an old man when he died and you if you see what 
Methusaleh saw, 

You will be an old man or an old woman when you die 

Repeat it Methusaleh saw many cabbages and kings, he was a witness, 
a looker-on like me, like you 

Repeat it Methusaleh was an old man, he saw much before he was 
through, and you or I, if we see what Methusaleh saw, if we see it 
all before we are through. 

You and I will be old, old as Methusaleh, old with our looking on at 
cabbages and kings, widows of the sod and the grass, triangles, and 
people with babies to cry for and no babies at all to cry for 

Repeat it Methusaleh was a witness of repeating figures, sea patterns in 
the sea sand, land patterns of the land wind, Methusaleh was a wit- 
ness, a looker-on like me, like you 


SKETCH OF A POET 

He wastes time walking and telling the air, '‘I am superior even to the 
wind ” 

On several proud days he has addressed the wide circumambient atmos- 
phere, am the wind myself '' 

He has poet's license 4-11-44, he got it even before writing of those '"silver 
bugs that come on the sky without warning every evening " 

He stops for the buzzing of bumblebees on bright Tuesdays in any 
summer month, he performs with a pencil all alone among dun cat- 
tails, amid climbing jumper bushes, notations rivaling the foot tracks of 
anxious spiders, he finds mice homes under beach logs in the sand and 
pursues mquines on how the mice have one room for bed-room, dining- 
room, sitting-room and how they have no front porch where they sit pub- 
licly and watch passers-by 




360 


  


He asks himself, “Who else is the emperor of such elegant english? Who 
else has slipped so often on penlous banana peels and yet lived to put 
praise of banana peels on sonorous pages?” 

One minute he accuses God of having started the world on a shoestring, 
the next minute he executes a simple twist of the wnst and a slight mo- 
tion of the hand and insinuates these bones shall rise again 

Yet he wastes time walking and telling the air, “I am superior to the 
wind,” or on proud days, “I am the wind myself ” 


WHIFFS OF THE OHIO RIVER AT CINCINNATI 

1 

A YOUNG thing in spnng green slippers, stockings, 
silk vivid as lilac-time grass. 

And a red line of a flaunt of fresh silk again up under 
her chin— - 

She slipped along the street at half-past six in the evening, 
came out of the stairway where her street address is, 
where she has a telephone number- 
just a couple of blocks from the street next to the 
Ohio nver, where men sit in chairs tipped back, 
watching the evening lights on the water of the 
Ohio river— 

She started out for the evening, dark brown calf eyes, 
roaming and hunted eyes. 

And her young wild ways were not so young any more, 
nor so wild 

Another evening primrose stood in a stairway, with a 
white knit sweater fitting her shoulders and nbs close 
She asked a young ballplayer passing for a few kind words 
and a pleasant look — and he slouched up to her like an 
umpire calling a runner out at the home plate— he 
gave her a few words and passed on 
She had bells on, she was jingling, and yet— her young 
wild ways were not so young any more, nor so wild 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


361 


2 

When I asked for fish in the restaurant facing the Ohio river, with fish 
signs and fish pictures all over the wooden, crooked frame of the fish 
shack, the young man said, '*Come around next Friday— the fish is 
all gone today '' 

So, I took eggs, fried, straight up, one side, and he murmured, humming, 
looking out at the shining breast of the Ohio river, ''And the next 
IS something else, and the next is something else '' 

The customer next was a hoarse roustabout, handling nail kegs on a 
steamboat all day, asking for three eggs, sunny side up, three, noth- 
ing less, shake us a mean pan of eggs 

And while we sat eating eggs, looking at the shining breast of the Ohio 
river in the evening lights, he had his thoughts and I had mine 
thinking how the French who found the Ohio river named it La 
Belle Riviere meaning a woman easy to look at. 


SUBURBAN SICILIAN SKETCHES 
1 

The cockleburs came on the burdocks, 
a little of thistle, a little of flower, 
a light red purple tip on raw green bur 

The burdocks came like hoodlums come, 
they came with neither permits nor requests, 
they took what they wanted 'Tf anybody 
asks you, this is us, and we are here because 
we decided to come to the party— we invited 
ourselves and we are welcome 

Listen in the summer when the roots dig in, 
the hoodlum roots of the burdock gangs, 
what each one sings is much like— 

'Tm gonna live anyhow until I die 

In the time of the turning leaves 

the light red purple tip and the raw green bur 

pass and turn to a brown, to a drab and dirty brown 



362 


  


2 

In Mel'a^rose among the sons of Sicily 
I saw a sheep, a dirty undersized sheep, 

In the front yard cabbage patch of a son of Sicily, 

And the wool of the sheep had never been combed, 

The wool of the sheep was snarled and knotted 
And the burdock gang was there, 

Burs in the wool with a drab and hoodlum mutter. 

This is us, we invited ourselves and we*re welcome ’ 

3 

The sober-faced goat crops grass next to the sidewalk 
A clinking chain connects the collar of the goat with a steel pm driven 
in the ground 

Next to the sidewalk the goat crops November grass, 

Pauses seldom, halts not at all, incessantly goes after grass 

4 

The playhouse of the Sicilian children 
thatched with maple branches their father 
threw over for a roof m summer, 
the playhouse roof is dry, 

It sags and crackles in the west wind 

5 

The Sicilian father is tying cornstalks 
for a winter vest at the roots of the young apple tree 
This, and the red peppers drying on the cellar door, 
this IS one of the signs of November 


FLAT WATERS OF THE WEST IN KANSAS 

After the sunset m the mountains 
there are shadows and shoulders 
standing to the stars 
After the sunset on the prairie 
there are only the stars, 
the stars standing alone. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


363 


The flat waters of the west in Kansas 

take up the sunset lights 

one by one and all— 

the bars, the barriers, the slow-down, 

the loose lasso handy on the saddle, 

the big hats, the slip-knot handkerchiefs, 

the cattle horns, the hocks and haunches 

ready for the kneel-down, the sleep 

of the humps and heads in the grass, 

the pony with a rump to the wind 

or curving a neck to a front foot— 

if a baby moon comes after the sunset 

it IS a witness of many homes, 

many home-makers under the night sky-shed— 

and the flat waters of the west m Kansas 

take up the baby moon, the witness, 

take it and let it ride, 

take it and let it have a home 

The great plains 
gave the buffalo grass 

The great plains 
gave the buffalo grass 


THREE SLANTS AT NEW YORK 

New York is a city of many cats 
Some say New York is Babylon 
There is a rose and gold mist New York. 

New York is a city of many cats, they eat the swill of the poor and the 
swell swill, they rub their backs against fire escapes and weep to each 
other from alley barrels, they are bom to the cat life of New York 

Some say New York is Babylon, here are Babylonian dancers stripped to 
the flash of the navel, while the waiters murmur, ‘Tes,"' in undertones 
to regular customers calling for the same whiskey as last time, and having 
seen a thing of much preparation, toil and genius, having spoken to each 



364 


  


Other of how marvelous it is, they eat and drink till it is forgotten, and 
the topics are easy topics, such as which bootleggers take the biggest 
nsks, and what light risks superior bootleggers travel under 

There is a rose and gold New York of evening lights and sunsets, there 
is a mist New York seen from steamboats, a massed and spotted hover- 
ing ghost, a shape the fists of men have lifted out of dirt and work and 
daylight and early morning oaths after sleep nights 

New York is a city of many cats 
Some say New York is Babylon 
There is a rose and gold mist New York 


LANDSCAPE INCLUDING THREE STATES OF THE UNION 

The mountains stand up around the main street m Harper's Ferry 
Shadows stand around the town, and mist creeps up the flanks of tall 
rocks 

A terrible push of waters sometime made a cloven way for their flood 
here 

On the main street the houses huddle, the walls crouch for cover 
And yet— up at Hilltop House, or up on Jefferson’s Rock, there are 
lookouts. 

There are the long curves of the meeting of the Potomac and the 
Shenandoah, 

There is the running water home of living fish and silver of the sun 
The lazy flat rocks spread out browns for green and blue silver to run 
over 

Mascots of silver circles move around Harper’s Ferry 
No wonder John Brown came here to fight and be hanged 
No wonder Thomas Jefferson came here to sit with his proud red head 
writing notes on the great State of Virginia 
Borders hem the town, borders of Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, 
Be absent minded a minute or two and you guess at what state you 
are m 

Harper’s Ferry is a meeting place of winds and waters, rocks and ranges 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


365 


CROSSING OHIO WHEN POPPIES BLOOM IN ASHTABULA 

1 

Go away Leave the high winds of May 
blowing over the fields of grape vines 
near the northwest comer of Pennsylvania 
Leave the doorstep peonies 
pushing high bosoms at passers-by 
in northern Ohio towns m May 

Leave the boys flying light blue kites 
on a deep blue sky, and the yellow, the 
yellow spilling over the drinking rims 
of the buttercups, piling their yellows 
into foam blown sea rims of yellow, 

Go away, go to New York, 

Broadway, Fifth Avenue, glass 
lights and leaves, glass faces, 
fingers, go 


2 

Pick me poppies m Ohio, 
mother 

Pick me poppies in a back yard 
in Ashtabula 

May going, poppies coming, summer humming 
make it a poppy summer, mother, the leaves 
sing in the silk, the leaves sing a tawny 
red gold, seven sunsets saved themselves 
to be here now 

Pick me poppies, mother, go. May, wash me, 
summer, shoot up this back yard in Ashta- 
bula, shoot it up, give us a daylight fire- 
works in Ohio, burn it up with tawny red 
gold 



366 


  


MARCH OF THE HUNGRY MOUNTAINS 

Across Nevada and Utah 

Look for the inarch of the hungry mountains 

They are cold and white. 

They are taking a rest, 

They washed their faces in awful fires, 

They lifted their heads for heavy snows 

White, O white, are the vapors. 

And the wind in the early morning, 

White are the hungry mountains 

The tireless gray desert, 

The tireless salt sea. 

The tireless mountains. 

They are thinking over something 
They are wondering, “What next?” 

They are thankful, thinking it over. 

Waiting, sleeping, drying their faces from awful fires. 
Lifting their heads into higher snow. 

White in the early morning wmd 

“Come and listen to us,” 

Said the marching, hungry mountains 
“You will hear nothing at all. 

And you will learn only a little. 

And, yet listening, your ears may grow longer and softer. 

You may yet have long, clear, listening ears 

Come and listen,” said the mocking, hungry mountains 


DIALOGUE 

LAKE MICHIGAN We have been here quite a while 

ILLINOIS PRAIRIE Maybe 

LAKE We have seen ten cities 

PRAIRIE. Eleven 

LAKE Eleven with Chicago 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


567 


SMOKE BLUE 

The mountains stood on their bottom ends, 
the smoky mountains stood around in blue, 
the blue mountains stood around m smoke, 

The higher the line of the burnt timber climbed, 

the lower the line of the green timber crept, 

the creep of the burnt and the green 

was a couple of shadows moving through each other 

The farms and the fences came. 

And the farmers fixing fences 

The snake rail fences measured the farms. 

Hog tight, horse high, they held for the owners 
The hogs for hams and the horses for hauls 

The farms came to the valley, 

And the mountains stood on their bottom ends. 

The mountains stood m a smoke and a blue 

The cities came, the lumber wagons, 

The lumber carpenters, the lathers, the plasterers, 

The bricklayers came in their overalls. 

And the hod-carriers up and down the ladders with mortar 
And the bricklayers calling down to the hod-carriers, 
"Morti" 

And the concrete mixers came with their endless bellies 
For sand and crushed stone and gravel and cement. 

The cities came, stood up, and swore, 'This is us, by God 
The cities, the families, the tall two-fisted men, swearing, 
"This IS us, by God, this is God's country" 

The boomers boomed the boosters. 

The boosters boosted the boomers 

And the mountains stood on their bottom ends. 

The mountains stood m a smoke and a blue, 



368 


  


AGAIN? 

Old Man Woolworth put up a building 
There it was, his dream, all trae. 

The biggest building in the world 
Babel, the Nineveh Hanging Gardens, 

Karnak, all old, outclassed 
And now, here at last, what of it? 

What about it? Well, every morning 
We’ll walk around it and look up 
And every morning we’ll ask what 
It means and where it’s going 
It’s a dream, all true, going somewhere. 

That’s a cinch, women buying mousetraps. 

Wire cloth dishrags, ten cent sheet music. 

They paid for it, the electric tower 
Might yell an electnc sign to the inbound 
Ocean liners, ‘Look what the washerwomen 
Of Amenca can do with their nickels,’ or 
‘See what a nickel and a dime can do,’ 

And that wouldn’t clear Old Man Woolworth’s 
Head, it was a mystery, a dream, the biggest 
Building in the world, Babel, the Nineveh 
Hanging Gardens, Kamak, all old. 

Outclassed So the old man cashes in. 

The will of the old man is dug out. 

And the widow gets thirty million dollars. 

Enough to put up another building. 

Another bigger than any in the world. 

Bigger than Babel, the Nineveh Hanging Gardens, 
Kamak, another mystery, another dream 
To stand and look up at 
And ask what it means. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


369 


EVEN NUMBERS 
1 

A HOUSE like a man all lean and coughing, 
a man with his two hands in the air at a cry, 

"Hands up 

A house like a woman shrunken and stoop-shouldered, 
shrunken and done with dishes and dances 

These two houses I saw going uphill in Cincinnati 

2 

Two houses leaning against each other like drunken 
brothers at a funeral, 

Two houses facing each other like two blind wrestlers 
hunting a hold on each other. 

These four scrawny houses I saw on a dead level 
cinder patch m Scranton, Pennsylvania 

3 

And by the light of a white moon m Waukesha, Wisconsin, 
I saw a lattice work in lilac time white-mist lavender 
a sweet moonlit lavender 


CHILLICOTHE 

There was a man walked out 
Of a house in Chillicothe, Ohio,— 

Or the house was m Chillicothe, Illinois, 

Or again in Chillicothe, Missouri,— 

And the man said to himself. 

Speaking as men speak their thoughts 
To themselves after a funeral or a wedding. 
After seeing a baby born with raw, red toes 



370 


  


And the toe-nails pink as the leaves of fresh flowers, 

Or after seeing a kinsman try to hold on 
To the fading door-frames of life 
And then languish, let go, and sleep,— 

Speaking his own thoughts. 

Or what he believed m so far as he knew 
To be thoughts peculiar to himself alone, 

At that hour of time, under the clocks and suns. 

He said, and to himself 

have never seen myself live a day 
I have told myself I get up m the morning, 

I wash my face, I reach for a towel, I find a razor, 

I shave off a day- or a two-day growth of whiskers 
I look in the looking-glass and say, 

'Birdie, whither away today?' or I say, 

'You old hound dog, are you on to yourself?' or 
'What's m the wind for this evening?' or, 

'Who put the fish m efficiency?' or, 

'What packages will be handed us this morning?' 

"Yes, I stand m front of the looking-glass, 

And while I am shaving I sometimes ask questions 
Exactly as though the house I am shaving in 
Is a wagon crossing Oklahoma looking for a home. 

Or a steamboat on the tossing salt, two days from Sandy 
Hook, 

Or a Pullman sleeper crossing the divide m Colorado— 
This must be why I say to the looking-glass, 

'You are the same when I am shaving, always. 

Whether we are in Oklahoma, off Sandy Hook, 

Or hitting the high spot of the Colorado divide, 

Your business as a looking-glass is to say 'Me, too,' 

'Here it is,' 'Here you are,' 'I don't want to tell you no he 
If I tell a lie, I lose out as a looking-glass ' 

"There are hinged elbows of arms, sockets m shoulder- 
bones 

And out beyond the elbows are finger-bones, finger-ends 


GOOD MORNING^ AMERICA 


37i 


And after a while the command runs out to the finger-ends 
To wipe off the lather, throw a hot towel, witch hazel, 

Then dry smooth the face, talcum, and call it a once over 
This action finished, I can testify all day, 'I shaved this 
morning" 

Or if there is a murder or a robbery, and I am called as a 
witness 

In the matter of an identity or an alibi or corpus delicti, 

I can solemnly swear at this hour I shaved my face, at this 
hour 

I commanded the members and parts of my body in these 
performances 
I shaved this morning 

'Tet all this is only a whiff, a little comic beginning 
Ever since I have owned more than one shirt 
I have had to decide which shirt to wear today 
There was a year when I had only one shirt, 

And even then I had to decide whether I would wear that 
one shirt 

Or whether I would get along with no shirt at all 
Now, having six shirts, I must pick one and let five others 

go 

If there are buttons off the shirt, I decide 
How many new buttons go on 

''Decisions— see? It is early in the day, it is not a half-hour 
Since I was in the sheets of unremembermg slumber 
Yet the day"s decisions have mounted steadily as the climb 
of the sun 

Up and on across the elements of the sky 

"Yes? Quite so And sure, Mike 
These things count for nothing much 
There is no special destiny about them 
They are different from falling m love 
Or calling up a doctor to tie an artery 
Or writing a lawyer about a bastardy case. 

Or telling a panhandler you are broke yourself, 

And do your shopping by looking in the show-windows 



  


372 

'Tes, they are all different 
Yet they all connect up with civilization 
Or tombs and ramparts earlier than civilization 
So God help your soul when you get tired of them and say 
1 want something new I want two and two to be five I want a miracle 
to happen, miracles now and henceforth I want the light that never 
was on land or sea ' '' 

And all the time it is the same man speaking, 

The same man who walked out of his house 
In Chillicothe, Ohio, Chilhcothe, Illinois, or Chillicothe, 

Missouri, 

It IS the same man speaking his own thoughts. 

As if thoughts come to him and belong to him alone. 

And as though it is useless to pass them on— 

It is the same man speaking 

'1 have never seen myself live a day 
I have pulled up a chair to the breakfast table 
And watched children tuck napkins under their chin. 

Spill the yellow of eggs down their bibs. 

Clean their plates, lick their spoons, call for more to eat. 

While they banged their spoons and bowls on the table 
And went on yammering for more to eat 
I have seen them use their tongues as cats and dogs 
Employ their tongues, as utensils, conveniences. 

With laughters shining in their eyes 

And when they began talking, they lied to each other, 

They lied with an importance of falsifying large 
They broke out with impossible propositions 
They acted as though they live in a republic of separate 
laws. 

Under a government whose laws go deeper than the speech 
Of people expert and renowned for their ways of speech 
Their laughter ran as the water of waterfalls runs 

‘They were so proud, so sure, in all their ways, I said 
‘What goes? What drops off? What is the sheath they lose 
When they grow up and get big and leave behind them 
Their republic of separate laws. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


373 


Their government of laws deeper than speech, 

Their civilization of impossible propositions? 

Why shall they seem no longer so proud, so sure. 

With laughter running as the water of waterfalls runs?' 

ask myself just that question 
I asked it far inside of myself 

And it was such a far-off question, if I had whispered it 
They would have known it was not to be answered " 

And this was only one morning 

Among the many mornings of that man 

Speaking to himself what he considered his own thoughts 

Going out of the door of his house m Chillicothe 

And these are only a few of the thoughts of that one morning 
For, when he reached the gate and stepped to the sidewalk. 

He said again to himself 

''I have never seen myself live a day " 


SPLINTER 

The voice of the last cricket 
across the first frost 
is one kind of good-by 
It is so thin a splinter of singing 


SANTA FE SKETCHES 
1 

The valley was swept with a blue broom to the west. 

And to the west, on the fringes of a mesa sunset, 
there are blue broom leavings, hangover blue wisps— 
bluer than the blue floor the broom touched 
before and after it caught the blue sweepings 

The valley was swept with a blue broom to the west 



374 


  


2 

When a city picks a valley— and a valley picks a city— 
it IS a marriage— and there are children 

Since the bluebirds come by twenties 

and the blackbirds come by forties 

in March, when the snow skirls in a sunshine wind, 

since they come up the valley to the city, heading north, 

it is taken as a testimony of witnesses 

When the bluebird barriers drop, 

when the redwing bars go down, 

the flumes of sun flash now on the tail feathers— 

it is up the valley— up and on— 

by twenties and forties— 

and the tail feathers flashing 

In the cuts of the red dirt arroyos, 

at the change of the mist of the mountain waterfalls, 

m cedars and pinons, at the scars and gashes, 

at the patches where new corn will be planted, 

at the Little Canyon of the Beans, 

they stop and count how far they have come, 

the twenties and forties stop and count 

Whoever expected them to remember, 
to carry little pencils between their toes, 
notebooks under their wmgs^ 

By twenties, by forties— it is enough, 

*'When wings come, and sun, and a new wind 
out of the Southwest whispering— 
and especially wings— we forget— 
we forget” 

They saw Navajos ride with spears and arrows, 

Spaniards nde with blunderbusses, 

cowboys ride with Colts and Winchesters— 

they saw the changing shooting irons— 

and now the touring-car and flivver 

creep up the red dirt valley, among the rabbit bushes. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


375 


passing the clean-piled clean-cut woodpiles 
on the backs of mountain-born burros 

3 

The valley sits with its thoughts 

'"Have I not had my thoughts by myself 
four hundred years^'' she asks 

“Have I not seen the guns of Spam, Mexico 
and America go up and down the valley? 

“Is not holy faith and the name of a saint 
in my name? 

“Was I not called La Villa de Sante Fe de 
San Francisco de Assisi? 

“Do they not name a railroad from Chicago 
to Los Angeles after me? 

“Did they not give a two-thousand-mile wagon 
trail of the first gold diggers, the forty-niners, 
my name, the short pet name, Santa Fe? 

“Do you wonder I sit here, like an easy woman, 
not young, not old— 

Do you wonder I sit here, shrewd, faded, asking 
What next? who next? 

And answering my own questions I don't care- 
let the years worry " 

4 

By twenties and forties, 
the bluebirds and the redwings, 
out of the bars, the bamers, 
in a flash of tail feathers 
on and up the valley— 

“When wings come 

and the Southwest whispenng, 

we forget/' 



  


376 


5 

The valley city sits among its brooding facts, 

'"Six years ago— only ponies, bridles, saddles circled 
around the public square, the plaza, the place of the 
Summer band concerts— 

And now— the varnished motor-cars stand with funeral 
faces filling the old pony hitching places 

'"I have seen candles keep the night watch till the coal 
oil came and then the live wires— 

Thirty miles away the mountain villages see two strings 
of lights hung like Summer flies— the penitentiary night 
lights of Santa Fe 

'The fast travelers with extra tires come in a hurry 
and solve me and pass on to say all their lives, 

'Santa Fe? oh yes, Santa Fe, I have seen Santa Fe ' 

'Hurry up,’ is their first and last word on my zigzag 
streets, my lazy ’dobe corners 

'Hurry up, we must see the Old Church, the Old Bell, the 
Oldest House in the United States, touch the doors, 
and then go on— hurry up^’ 

"They are afraid grass will grow under their feet— they 
say so as a proverb— 

And I am afraid they will knock loose some cool green 
whisper of moss m a chink of a wall ” 

6 

In April the little farmers go out in the foothills, 

up the mountain patches 

They go to gamble against the weather, the ram 

"If the ram comes like last year, we shall have a fat 
winter, 

If the ram comes like year before last, it is a lean 
Chnstmas for us ” 

They put m their beans, the magic frijole, the chile, 
they stretch open hands to the sky, 
and tell the ram to come, 
to come, come, come 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


377 


With a willing ram the gamblers win 
If the ram says, ''Not this year,"' they lose 

So the little farmers go out in the foothills, 

up the mountain patches m April, 

telling every bean in the sack 

to send up a wish to God 

for water to come . , out of the sky. 

7 

A loose and changeable sky 

looks on a loose and changeable land 

The ram rips the wagon road ruts 

too deep for wheels— the wagons make a new road, 
the ram makes a new little arroyo 
Pack burros tussling under bundled woodpiles go by 
with eyes murmuring, ''Everything is the same as it 
always was '' 

The tough little tussling foot of a burro, the wag of 
a left ear to a right ear, are they joking, "Every- 
thing is the same as it always was^'' 

8 

Proud and lazy Spaniards with your pearl swords 
of conquest, your blunderbuss guns of flags and 
victory— 

Who did you conquer and fasten down as your vassals^ 

The blood is dry and mixed in a mixing-bowl 

The passion kiss and the sunlit blaze of the Indian woman’s eye— the 
faces and the hair of Spam and the Aztecs, Moors and the Navajos— 
are mixed m a mixing-bowl— and a passer-by writes- 

"In Mexico nobody knows how to sing 
and everybody sings ” 

Come back and pick up your pearl-handled swords, 
your blunderbuss guns 

Sniff with the tourists in the Santa Fe Museum— 


  


378 

See them look at their stop-watches— 

“A little gas now— and we’re on our way— come on 
kid— on your way ” 

9 

The valley was swept with a blue broom to the west, 

there are blue broom leavings on the sky, 

hangover blue wisps 

The valley city sits with its thoughts 

“Have I not had my thoughts by myself 

four hundred years?” she asks 

“Do you wonder I sit here, shrewd, faded, 

asking What next? who next? 

And answenng I don’t care— let the 
years worry ” 

10 

By twenties and forbes, 
the bluebirds and the redwings, 
out of the bars, the bamers, 
in a flash of tail feathers 
on and up the valley— 

“When wings come 

and the Southwest whispenng, 

we forget” 



•mm. 


NEW HAMPSHIRE AGAIN 

I BEMEMBER black Winter waters, 
I remember thin white birches, 
I remember sleepy twilight hills. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


379 


I remember riding across New 
Hampshire lengthways 

I remember a station named 
“Halcyon/' a brakeman call- 
ing to passengers “Halcyon^ 
Halcyon 

I remember having heard the 
gold diggers dig out only 
enough for wedding rings 

I remember a stately child tell- 
ing me her father gets letters 
addressed “Robert Frost, New 
Hampshire " 

I remember an old Irish saying, 
“His face is like a fiddle and 
every one who sees him must 
love him ” 

I have one remember, two re- 
members, ten remembers, I 
have a little handkerchief 
bundle of remembers 

One early evening star just over 
a cradle moon. 

One dark river with a spatter of 
later stars caught. 

One funnel of a motorcar head- 
light up a hill. 

One team of horses hauling a 
bobsled load of wood. 

One boy on skis picking himself 
up after a tumble— 

I remember one and a one and a 
one riding across New Hamp- 
shire lengthways I have a lit- 
tle handkerchief bundle of re- 
members 



$8o 


  


A COUPLE 

He was in Cincinnati, she m Burlington 
He was in a gang of Postal Telegraph linemen 
She was a pot rassler in a boarding house 
“The crying is lonely,” she wrote him 
“The same here,” he answered 

The winter went by and he came back and they marned 
And he went away again where rainstorms knocked down telegraph 
poles and wires dropped with frozen sleet 
And again she wrote him, “The crying is lonely ” 

And again he answered, “The same here ” 

Their five children are m the public schools 

He votes the Republican bcket and is a taxpayer 

They are known among those who know them 

As honest American citizens living honest lives 

Many things that bother other people never bother them 

They have their five children and they are a couple, 

A pair of birds that call to each other and satisfy 
As sure as he goes away she wntes him, “The crying is 
lonely” 

And he flashes back the old answer, “The same here ” 

It is a long time since he was a gang lineman at Cincinnati 
And she was a pot rassler m a Burlington boarding house. 

Yet they never get tired of each other, they are a couple 


CHICAGO BOY BABY 

The baby picked from an ash barrel by the night police 
came to the hospital of the Franciscan brothers 
m a diaper and a white sheet 

It was a windy night in October, leaves and geese scurrying 
across the north sky, and the curb pigeons more ravenous 
than ever for city com in the cracks of the street stones 

The two policemen who picked the baby from the ash barrel 
are grayheads, they talk about going on the pension list 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


3S1 


soon, they talk about whether the baby, surely a big man 
now, votes this year for Smith or Hoover 


JOKE GOLD 

It arose with him as a ]oke, 

His saying so often with a mystical gesture 
Known to all as a joke, 

'There's gold in them hills, Jack " 

All of us laughed and he laughed most 
At the comic illusion of gold hunters 
Picking hills to gamble in, with 
Hopes and shovels, burros and frying pans, 
The yellow shine of the high lure 
Overlying life's high points 
It was all there in his sudden interjection, 
"There's gold in them hills, Jack" 

His wife, his other women, his new jobs 
One after the other, his swaggering neckties, 
Sport shirts, and allusions to men with fat 
Checkbooks he lunched with chummily. 

It all tied in with his always saying 
Gold lay in hills beyond, joke gold 
In joke hills to be made into real gold 
In real hills for wishing, for only enough 
Wishing— it was all in his voice when he 
Went away and was never heard from again. 
Stepping on the outbound tram west 
Saying, "Gold in them hills. Jack " 


THE OLD FLAGMAN 
The old flagman has great-grandchildren 

Ruddy as a hard nut, hair in his ears, clear sea lights in his eyes. 
He goes out of his shanty and lifts a sign Stop 

"Y'see whete the sign is dented? 

I hit a fellah over the head with it. 



382 


  


The only way to stop him gettin' run over 
They want to get killed, I have to stop 'em 
That's my job " 

He was twenty years a policeman in Chicago 

''I carry a bullet in my guts an I got an abscess in my gall bladder— 
I picked this shanty for a rest 
I go slow and careful, I got a leak m the heart, if 
I laugh too hard my heart stops— and I fall down, 

I have to watch myself " 

A third rail car hoots up the line 
He goes out with a warning in his hand Stop 
'These damn fools, they want to get under the wheels 
I have to stop 'em " 

Ruddy as a hard nut, hair in his ears, clear sea lights in his eyes 


IGLITS AND HIS WIFE 

Iglits' wife spoke of her own novel, of a Norwegian's novel and came 
finally to speak of Whimsley and Whimsley's wife and egg spots on the 
wallpaper and fly specks on the new white kalsommmg of the sleeping 
room of Whimsley and Whimsley's wife 

Iglits' wife went on patching a picture together m clean polite 
language, hearsay and circumstance 

The cool abstraction of the scientist, the mocking sleight-of-hand passes 
of the artist, the galloping babble of the gossip who mixes names and 
dates for the sake of the story and only asks a laugh or a giggle before 
going on to another laugh— 

These were lost in the list of witnesses ready to testify to the egg 
spots on the wallpaper, the fly specks on the new white kalso- 
minmg of the sleeping room of Whimsley and Whimsley's wife 
Iglits mentions the weather to the housemaid serving washed apricots for 
breakfast, mentions letters and filing devices to the stenographer m the 
downtown ojBEce. 

Iglits buys whiskey from two booze runners, a bottle is in his desk 
always, Iglits says he wants to be lit up a little every day 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


383 


MEDLEY 

Ignorance came m stones of gold, 

The Ignorant slept while the hangmen 
Hanged the keepers of the lights 
Of sweet stars such were the apothegms, 

Offhand offerings of mule-drivers 
Eating sandwiches of rye bread. 

Salami and onions 

'Too Many Books,"' we always called him, 

A landscape of masterpieces and old favorites 

Fished with their titles for his eyes 

In the upstairs and downstairs rooms 

Of his house Whenever he passed 

The old-time bar-room where Pete Morehouse 

Shot the chief of police, where 

The sponge squads shot two bootleggers, 

He always remembered the verse story. 

The Face on the Bar-room Floor— 

The tramp on a winter night, 

Saddened and warmed with whiskey, 

Telling of a woman he wanted 
And a woman who wanted him, 

How whiskey wrecked it all. 

Taking a piece of chalk. 

Picturing her face on the bar-room floor. 

Fixing the lines of her face 
While he told the story, 

Then gasping and falling with finished heartbeats. 
Dead 

And whenever he passed over the bridge at night 
And took the look up the river to smaller bridges. 
Barge lights, and looming shores, 

He always thought of Edgar Allan Poe, 

With a load of hootch in him. 

Going to a party of respectable people 
Who called for a speech. 



384 


  


Who listened to Poe recite the Lord’s Prayer, 
Correctly, word for word, yet with lush, unmistakable 
Intonations, so haunting the dinner-party people 
All excused themselves to each other 

Whenever Too Many Books 

Passed over the town bndge in the gloaming. 

He thought of Poe breaking up that party 
Of respectable people Such was Too Many Books— 
We called him that 


IMPLICATIONS 

When the charge of election bnbery was brought against an Illinois 
senator, he replied, “I read the Bible and believe it from cover to cover ” 

When his accusers specified five hundred dollars of corruption money was 
paid in a St Louis hotel bathroom, his friends answered, “He is faithful 
to his wife and always kind to his children ” 

When he was ousted from the national senate and the doors of his bank 
were closed by government receivers and a grand jury indicted him, he 
took the vows of an old established church 

When a jury acquitted him of guilt as a bank wrecker, following the tes- 
timony of prominent citizens that he was an honest man, he issued a 
statement to the public for the newspapers, proclaiming he knew before- 
hand no jury would darken the future of an honest man with an unjust 
verdict 


TO THE GHOST OF JOHN MILTON 

If I should pamphleteer twenty years against royalists. 
With rewards offered for my capture dead or alive. 

And jails and scaffolds always near. 

And then my wife should die and three ignorant daughters 
Should talk about their father as a joke, and steal the 
Earnings of books, and the poorhouse always reaching for 
me, 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


385 


If I then lost my eyes and the world was all dark and I 
Sat with only memories and talk— 

I would write “Paradise Lost,” I would marry a second wife 
And on her dying I would marry a third pair of eyes to 
Serve my blind eyes, I would write “Paradise Regained,” I 
Would wnte wild, foggy, smoky, wordy books— 

I would sit by the fire and dream of hell and heaven. 

Idiots and kings, women my eyes could never look on again. 
And God Himself and the rebels God threw into hell 


HEAVY AND LIGHT 

And you, old woman, are carrying scrub buckets tonight 
Just like last year, just like the year before. 

Every Saturday night you come gnpping the handles. 

Throwing the suds, cleaning this room’s floor 

They call you “Mrs Swanson,” your hair is thin and gray. 

It IS a lean little wiry frame you move in 
In your eyes you are ready for whatever comes next 
Your sons have scrubbed ship decks, an uncle somewhere 
Stood at a wheel in a Baltic storm— why must there be 
Some rag of romance, some slant of a scarlet star 
Over and around your scrub buckets? 

Fritters used to say, “There is poetry in neckties ” 

He picked neckties with a theory of color and design 
He knew haberdashers the way book bugs know where second-hand book- 
stores are 

For a picnic he wore pink, for a fall fog day a gray blue. 

And a four-m-hand, a bow, a bat-eye, each in its separate individual silk, 
plain or shaped or spotted. 

Each had its message, its poem, its reminders, for Fntters 
“I know how to pick ’em,” he used to say, “I know the right scarf for 
either a wedding or a funeral or a poker party, there is poetry in 
neckties ” 


386 


  


EARLY HOURS 
(To A W F) 

Since you packed your rubber bottom boots 
And took the night tram for northern Wisconsin 
To hunt deer in the ten days allowed by law, 

I have remembered your saying the hunters 
Get up out of bed and dress for shooting, 

For reading snow tracks, circling, waiting, firing, 

At the hour of half past four in the morning, 

Now this has been in my mind sometimes 

When after a long day's work and more than half a night 

I opened the east window before going to bed 

At half past three o'clock in the morning 

And there were deer feet and horns of stars on the sky 

I listened to the chiming of a watch and said, 

''A couple of hours and Jim'll kill a deer, maybe " 

There are different kinds of early hours 


HUNGRY AND LAUGHING MEN 

Love to keep^ There is no love to keep 
There is memory to keep of running water, 

running horses, running weather, running days. 

When I see the ram-glad eaves filling and the 
beat of the running spills on the ferns, 

Or if I come to a pony heel mark, a half loop on 
a smooth Kentucky blue grass, 

Or stand m a Dutch landscape of running threats 
in changing lights of interchangeable running 
sun and rain-cloud— 

I shall take old note-books of Hokusai and Hiroshige, 

memoirs of the wonderful hungry laughing men, and m 
an off corner, write my code 

Love to keep? There is no love to keep 
There is memory of runners, foot-glad Singers, 
heel marks in the blue grass, running 
threats of interchangeable sun and rain-cloud 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


387 


FATE 

Fate comes with pennies or dollars 
An Indian head or the Goddess of Liberty 
it IS all the same to Fate 
One day copper, one day silver, and these 
are samples 

The cry held back 
the kiss kept under 
the song choked down 
the wish never spoken 
They are pennies and dollars these 
The girl at the sink washing dishes knows them 
The girl who has breakfast in bed knows them 


CHEAP BLUE 

Htt.t. blue among the leaves in summer. 

Hill blue among the branches in winter— 

Light sea blue at the sand beaches in winter, 
Deep sea blue m the deep deep waters— 

Frame blue, mountain blue — 

Who can pick a pocketful of these blues, 
a handkerchief of these blues, 

And go walking, talking, walking as though 
God gave them a lot of loose change 
For spending money, to throw at the birds. 
To flip into the tin cups of blind men? 


LAVENDER LILIES 

The lavender lilies in Garfield Park lay lazy in the morning sun. 

A cool summer wind flicked at our eyebrows and the pansies fixed their 
yellow drops and circles for a day’s show 

The statue of Lincoln, an ax in his hand, a bronze ax, was a chum of five 
bluejays crazy and calling, “Another lovely morning, another lovely 
mommg ” 



588 


  


And the headline of my newspaper said, 'Thirty dead in race riots/' 
And Lincoln with the ax, and all the lavender lilies and the cool summer 
wind and the pansies, the living lips of bronze and leaves, the living 
tongues of bluejays, all they could say was, 

"Another lovely morning, another lovely morning ” 


HALF WAY 

At the half-way house the pony died 
The road stretched ahead, the sunny hills, 
people in the fields, running waters, 
towns with new names, windmills pointing 
circles in the air at holy crossroads 
It was here we stopped at the half-way house, 
here where the pony died 
Here the keeper of the house said, "It is strange 
how many ponies die here " 


BETWEEN WORLDS 


And he said to himself 

in a sunken morning moon 

between two pines, 

between lost gold and lingering green 

I believe I will count up my worlds 

There seem to me to be three 

There is a world I came from which is Number One. 

There is a world I am in now, which is Number Two 
There is a world I go to next, which is Number Three 

There was the seed pouch, the place I lay dark in, nursed and shaped in 
a warm, red, wet cuddlmg place, if I tugged at a latchstring or 
doubled a dimpled fist or twitched a leg or a foot, only the Mother 
knew 

There is the place I am m now, where I look back and 
look ahead, and dream and wonder 


There is the next place-— 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


389 


And he took a look out of a window 
at a sunken morning moon 
between two pines, 
between lost gold and lingering green 


MXISS AND LOUIE 

When MXiss went away from the old home 
with its purple lilacs in front and white 
fence pickets and green grass— 

Where the slow black covers of evening and 
night came dropping softly before the gold 
moon came on the yellow roses— 

Louie, the lonesome, spoke his thoughts to himself, 
sitting in that same moonlight coming on the lilacs, 
the roses — 

Let her win her own thoughts, let her be 
M’Liss always, let her sit alone after 
whatever happens and see some of the outs 
and ins of it, 

Let her know the feel of the bones of 
one of her hands resting on the other. 

Let her lose love, gold, 
names, promises, savings. 

Let her know hot lips, crazy love letters, 
cool heels, good wings, birds crossing big 
windows of blue skies, time, oh God, time to 
think things over, let her be MXiss, 

Let her be easy with all meanings of quiet 
new sunsets, quiet fresh mornings, and long 
sleeps in the old still moonlight, 

Let her be MXiss always. 

Well . , . well . it was growing late m the evening of that day 
when M'Liss went away, late, late into the night, as Louie, the lone- 


390 


  


some, sat sleepy in the gold of that same moon coming on the fence 
pichets and the green grass, the purple lilacs, the yellow roses 

He was sleepy Yet he could not sleep 


Bitter Siii]am.er XlioTiigliLis 


PHIZZOG 


This face you got. 

This here phizzog >ou carry around, 

You never picked it out for yourself, 
at all, at all— did you? 

This here phizzog— somebody handed it 
to you— am I right? 

Somebody said, ''Here’s yours, now go see 
what >ou can do with it ” 

Somebody slipped it to you and it was like 
a package marked 

"No goods exchanged after being taken away”— 
This face you got 


BITTER SUMMER THOUGHTS 

The riders of the wind 
Weave their shadows. 

Trample their time-beats, 

Take their time-bars, 

Shake out scrolls, 

And run over the oats, the barley, 

Over the summer wheat-fields 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


391 


The farmer and the horse, 

The steel and the wagon 

Come and clean the fields 

And leave us stubble 

The time-bars of the wind are gone. 

The shadows, time-beats, scrolls. 

They are woven away, put past. 

Into the hands of threshers, 

Into chaff, into dust, 

Into rust and buff of straw stacks. 

Into sliding, shoveling oats and wheat 
Over the wheat-fields. 

Over the oats. 

Summer weaves, is woven away, put past, 

Into dust, into rust and buff 

Indian runners ran along this river road 

They cleaned the wind they clutched in ribs and lungs, 

Up over the clean ankles, the clean elbows 

The Frenchmen came with lessons and prayers 

The Scotchmen came with horses and rifles 

Cities, war, railroads came 

In the ram storms, in the blizzards. 

This river road is clean 


BITTER SUMMER THOUGHTS~NO 3 

Firecrackers came from China 

Watermelons came from Egypt 

The horses of the sun hoist their heads and nicker at the fence where the 
first old evening stars fish for faces 

And the light of the eyes of a child at a morning window calling to an 
early morning snow, this too is a stranger among strangers 

The splendors of old books may be counted 

The spears of brass lights, shining in the dawn of the tug-boats and ware 
houses, throw other splendors 

Yet a corn wind is in my ears, a rushing of com leaves swept by summer, 
it IS in my ears, the corn wind 



392 


  


BITTER SUMMER THOUGHTS~-NO XXII 

QUICKER AND EASIER 

The billboards and the street car signs told the people, 
''Say it with flowers” and those who could buy flowers 
And who knew no other way of saying found themselves 
In the habit of saying it with flowers 
Men whose personal fragrance had no special whiff 
Of fresh air, clean dirt, and growing things, 

Found it easier to telephone the florist 
And say it with flowers—quicker and easier 

YES, SAY IT WITH FLOWERS^ 

Women rather wear flowers than no flowers 
Gift flowers never tell where they came from 
A woman's flowers ought to whisper she has 
secrets worth hearing told 
If a woman tells a man, "Send me no flowers,” 
that IS the end 

All women try to guess who would send an armful 
of roses for the coffin if one dies, if one has 
a funeral, if all one's friends know there is a 
funeral 

Each woman knows what one flower she would wear if 
called on to wear a flower at a wedding tomorrow 


BARS 


Beat at the bars 
Cry out your cry of want 
Let yourself out if you can 
Find the sea, find the moon, 
if you can 

Shut the windows, open the doors 
There are no windows, are no doors? 
There is no sea, is no moon? 

Cry your cry, let yourself out if you can 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


393 


THEY ASK IS GOD, TOO, LONELY^ 

When God scooped up a handful of dust, 

And spit on it, and molded the shape of man. 

And blew a breath into it and told it to walk— 

That was a great day 

And did God do this because He was lonely^ 

Did God say to Himself he must have company 
And therefore He would make man to walk the earth 
And set apart churches for speech and song with God^ 

These are questions 
They are scrawled in old caves 
They are painted in tall cathedrals 
There are men and women so lonely they believe 
God, too, is lonely 


TWO NOCTURNS 
1 

The sea speaks a language polite people never repeat 
It IS a colossal scavenger slang and has no respect 
Is it a terrible thing to be lonely? 

2 

The prairie tells nothing unless the rain is willing 
It is a woman with thoughts of her own 
Is it a terrible thing to love much? 


USELESS WORDS 

So long as we speak the same language and never understand each other. 
So long as the spirals of our words snarl and interlock 
And clutch each other with the irreckonable gutturals. 

Well 



394 


  


WANTING THE IMPOSSIBLE 

Suppose he wishes balloon routes 
to five new moons, one woman, 
and a two-acre bean farm with 
bean poles and waltzing scare- 
crows wearing clown hats 
Ah-hah, ah-hah, this to God, 
this to me, this is something 


MONEY, POLITICS, LOVE AND GLORY 

Who put up that cage? 

Who hung it up with bars, doors? 

Why do those on the inside want to get out? 
Why do those outside want to get m? 

What is this crying inside and out all the time? 
What is this endless, useless beating of baffled 
wings at these bars, doors, this cage? 


THE WAY OF THE WORLD 
[After Gustave Eroding in the Swedish) 

The sea roars, the storm whistles. 

Waves roll ashen gray, 

*'Man overboard, captain 
Is that so? 

"'You can save his life yet, captain 
The sea roars, the storm whistles 
"Throw a rope to him, you can reach him 
Is that so? 

Waves roll ashen gray. 

"He's gone down, you can't see him 
any more, captaini" 

Is that so? 

The sea roars, the storm whistles 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


395 


EARLY LYNCHING 

Two Christs were at Golgotha 
One took the vinegar, another looked on 
One was on the cross, another in the mob 
One had the nails in his hands, another the stiff 
fingers holding a hammer driving nails 
There were many more Christs at Golgotha, many more 
thief pals, many many more in the mob howling the 
Judean equivalent of, ''Kill Him* Kill Him^"' 

The Christ they killed, the Christ they didn’t kill, 
those were the two at Golgotha 

Pity, pity, the bones of these broken ankles 
Pity, pity, the slimp of these broken wrists 
The mother’s arms are strong to the last 
She holds him and counts the heart drips 

The smell of the slums was on him 
Wrongs of the slums lit his eyes 
Songs of the slums wove in his voice 
The haters of the slums hated his slum heart 

The leaves of a mountain tree, 

Leaves with a spinning star shook in them. 

Rocks with a song of water, water, over them, 

Hawks with an eye for death any time, any time. 

The smell and the sway of these were on his sleeves, 
were in his nostrils, his words 

The slum man they killed, the mountain man lives on 


PLUNGER 

Empty the last drop 
Pour out the final clinging heartbeat 
Great losers look on and smile 
Great winners look on and smile 

Plunger 

Take a long breath and let yourself go 



396 



RAIN WINDS BLOW DOORS OPEN 

Dreaming of grips at her heart 

She asked m a sleep and between sleeps, 

'What IS mercy and why am I asking mercy?'' 

The doors in her dreams opened 
And a rain wind blew in the doorway 
And treetops moaned under footsteps over 

Dreaming of a road running off 

Into the roads gone crossways on the sky, 

She shook m a dream and cried between sleeps, 

"How many miles, how many days, how many years?" 

The strips of the sun 

Spelled a name on the floor in the morning 
She tried to spell out the name, the letters 
"A ram wind blows in the doorway," she said, 

"And a road goes crossways on the sky," she said, 
"And the night lets nobody know how many miles, 
how many days, how many years " 


WIND HORSES 

Roots, go deep wrap your coils, fasten your knots 
Fix a loop far under, a four-m-hand far under 
The wind drives wild horses, gnashers, plungers 
Go deep, roots 

Hold vour four-in-hand knots against all wild horses 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


397 


RIVER MOON 

The moon in the river, mother, is a red, red moon tonight 

I am going away on the wild, wild moon, the moon so red on the river 
tonight, mother 

A man with a wild dream on his tongue, a flying wild dream in his 
head and his heart, 

A man is here with a runaway drum m his ribs, and shots of the sun in 
the runners of his blood 

I am going away on the red, wild runaway moon 

The moon on the river, mother, is red tonight 

The mist on the river is white and the moon on the mist is white 

I remember, mother, I remember he came when the moon was red, with 
a runaway drum m his ribs 

I remember, mother, the shots of the sun in the runners of his blood, 
the flying wild dream on his tongue 

Tonight I remember, tonight with the mist on the river white and the 
moon on the mist white 

Something is gone— is it him that’ s gone or is it the red, wild runaway 
moon that’s gone? 


THEY MET YOUNG 
1 

'T COULD cry for roses, thinking of you. 
Thinking of your lips, so like roses. 
Thinking of the meetings of lips 
And the crying of eyes meeting ” 

'T could love you m shadows, drinking 
Of you, drinking till a morning sun 
I could touch the young heart of you 
And learn all your red songs ” 


398 


  


'1 could answer the metronomes of blood, 
The time-beats of your sweet kisses 
I could sing a star song or a sun song 
In the crying of eyes meeting '' 

2 

''Give me your lips 
Let Egypt come or Egypt go 
Open a window of stars 
Let a bag of shooting stars fall 
Wind us with a winding silk 
Pick us a slouching, foolish moon 
Take us to a silver blue morning 
It is too much— let your lips go 
The hammers call, the laws of the 

hammers knock on gongs, beat and 
beat on gongs 

It is too much— give me your lips 
—let your lips go ” 


YELLOW EVENING STAR 

The flush pink runner of the sun 
Ran out with a ribbon leap 
In the line of a yellow evening star 

Was there a murmur? 

"Whither thou goest thither will I go?'' 
Was there a run and a jump— 

Then old sea cliffs, clean high bastions? 


FACE 

I WOULD beat out your face in brass 
The side of your head I would beat out m brass 
The nose, the mouth, the hang of the hair thick over 
your head, the cool straight-looking forehead. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


399 


I would take a hammer and a sheet of brass and beat 
them out till your face would be set against ram, 
frost, storm, sea-water and sea-salt, against hoofs, 
wheels, nails, against tidewater, rust, verdigris 
I would set your face at a blue crossways of sea beaches, 
a dream of blue and brass 


HEAD 

Here is a head with a blur of horizons 
She sits where a sweep of leaves is on 
When the wind swept in the spring leaves. 
When the wind swept out the autumn leaves, 
She sat here with her head a blur of horizons 
She sat here and a worker in brass asked her 
And no answer came and the winds swept on 
And the leaves swept on and her head took form 
Against the blur of horizons 


EXPLANATIONS OF LOVE 

There is a place where love begins and a place 
where love ends 

There is a touch of two hands that foils all 
dictionaries 

There is a look of eyes fierce as a big Bethlehem open hearth 
furnace or a little green-fire acetylene torch 

There are single careless bywords portentous as a 
big bend in the Mississippi River 

Hands, eyes, bywords— out of these love makes 
battlegrounds and workshops 

There is sl pair of shoes love wears and the coming 
is a mystery 



400 


  


There is a warning love sends and the cost of it 
IS never written till long afterward 

There are explanations of love in all languages 
and not one found wiser than this 

There is a place where love begins and a place 
where love ends—and love asks nothing 


SEVEN ELEVEN 

Among the grackles in a half circle on the grass 
Two walked side by side on two legs apiece 

Treetops bent in the wind and bird nests shuddered 
This was why and only why the grackles sat in a half circle 

Seven grackles came at first and sat in the half circle 
Then there were eleven came with two legs apiece and sat m 

They might have been crapshooters full of hope and hot 
breaths 

They might have been believers in luck, come seven, come 
eleven 


SPRAY 

I WONDER what they called 
Across the beaten spray. 

Across the night's forehead 

'The long kiss lasts," he told her 
'Tm crazy about you,” she answered 

So they called 

to the beaten spray, 
to the night's forehead 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


401 


BROKEN HEARTED SOPRANO 

When the soprano sang, 

"'Ask the stars, O beloved,'' 

There was a wind piling a cover, 

Over the sky a cover of black 

And the soprano was feeling 
With a left hand over her heart 
Trying to feel the deep hurt places. 

Trying to measure the tired depths 

There is a wind piles covers 

The sky knows that wind out of old times 

The stars know that wind out of old times 

4 « « 

Have you pointed a finger 

And beckoned a loose hand 

Up at one star and found no answer^ 


EPISTLE 

Jesus loved the sunsets on Galilee 
Jesus loved the fishing boats forming silhouettes 
against the sunsets on Galilee 
Jesus loved the fishermen on the fishing boats forming 
silhouettes against the sunsets on Galilee 
When Jesus said Good-by, good-by, I will come again 

Jesus meant that good-by for the sunsets, the fishing boats, the fish- 
ermen, the silhouettes all and any against the sunsets on Galilee 
the good-by and the promise meant all or nothing 


MONKEY OF STARS 

There was a tree of stars sprang up on a vertical panel of the south 
And a monkey of stars climbed up and down in this tree of stars 
And a monkey picked stars and put them in his mouth, tall up in a tree 
of stars shining in a south sky panel 



402 


  


I saw this and I saw what it meant and what it means was five, six, 
seven, that's all, five, six, seven 

Oh hoh, yah yah, loo loo, the meaning was five, six, seven, five, six, seven 

Panels of changing stars, sashes of vapor, silver tails of meteor streams, 
washes and rockets of fire — 

It was only a dream, oh hoh, yah yah, loo loo, only a dream, five, six, 
seven, five, six, seven 


SEA CHEST 

There was a woman loved a man 

as the man loved the sea 

Her thoughts of him were the same 

as his thoughts of the sea 

They made an old sea chest for their belongings 

together 


WE HAVE GONE THROUGH GREAT ROOMS TOGETHER 

And when on the dark steel came the roads 
Of a milky mist, and a spray of stars. 

Bunches and squares and a spatter of stars. 

We counted stars, one by one, a million and a million 
And we remembered those stars as fishermen remember fish. 

As bees remember blossoms, as crops remember rains 

And these were rooms too, we can so reckon 

We can always say we have gone through great rooms together 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


403 


LOVE IN LABRADOR 

One arch of the sky 
Took on a spray of jewels 

The crystals gleamed on the windows 
Weaving their wintnsh alphabets 
Of spears and ovals fixed in frost 
Fastened to a glass design 
With a word This must be 

There are shooters of the moon far north 
There are dying eyes holding diadems 
There are deaths sweet as laughing waters 
There are gold heelprints on the fading 
staircases of the stars 


SLEEP IMPRESSION 

The dark blue wind of early autumn 
ran on the early autumn sky 
in the fields of yellow moon harvest 
I slept, I almost slept, 

I said listening 

Trees you have leaves rustling like rain 
When there is no ram 


MAYBE 

Maybe he believes me, maybe not 
Maybe I can marry him, maybe not 
Maybe the wind on the prairie, 

The wind on the sea, maybe. 

Somebody somewhere, maybe, can tell 
I will lay my head on his shoulder 
And when he asks me I will say yes. 
Maybe 


404 


  


BUG SPOTS 

This bug carries spots on his back 
Last summer he carried these spots 
Now it is spring and he is back here again 
With a domino design over his wings 
All winter he has been in a bedroom, 

In a hole, in a hammock, hung up, stuck away. 
Stashed while the snow blew over 
The wind and the dripping icicles. 

The tunnels of the frost 

Now he has errands again in a rotten stump 


UNDERSTANDINGS IN BLUE 

The bird sat on a red handle 
Counting five star flowers, 

Five clover leafs 

The bird was a pigeon 
Wearing a quiet understanding 
Of how to wear blue 

There is pigeon blue 

Picked out of baskets of big sky 

When the springtime is blue 

This was the blue fadeout fire 
Resting on the pigeon wings 
In a quiet understanding 

The red handle, the star flowers, 
The green clover leafs, 

Wove into the weaves of blue 

The big sky stood back of it all 
With a basket of springtime blue 
And an understanding all alone 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


405 


LET THEM ASK YOUR PARDON 

Child, what can those old men bring you^ 

If they can bring you a new handful 
Absolutely warm and soft as summer rain, 

Let them ask your pardon and do it soon 
Otherwise, why are they old? 

Otherwise, why should they look at you 
And carry assumptions in their old eyes 
And speak such words as 'hg>no-rance'' 

And “wisdom' —let them ask your pardon 
Showing you how summer ram is an old pal 
Of the wriggle of the angleworm, 

The flip of the muskalonge. 

And the step of the walking ram 
Across the praine If the old men, child. 

Tell you no stories about rockets. 

Shooting stars, horses of high ranges. 

Let them ask your pardon, excuse themselves. 
And go away 


STRIPED CATS, OLD MEN AND PROUD STOCKINGS 

1 

Ride a black horse with tan feet. 

Let him have splashes of white. 

Peninsulas of milk white 
Tell him, “Giddap, paint horse " 

Ride him then with a bndle in your left hand 
and a hawk sitting on your right wrist 
Wear a yellow dress and an orange bandana 
tied over your forehead 
So should a proud woman ride a proud horse 
So should a woman ride to a horse show, a bird show, 

To a public procession, to a secret wedding. 

To a crying menagerie of proud striped cats 



4o6 


  


2 

The old men who sit cross-legged in Hindustan 
Naming the wedding days, the hungry days, the work days. 
Handling their whiskers softly where the cascades 
Come down numbering the years and the facts— 

The old men look better close to the earth, cross-legged, 
Pegged near the dirt, the home of the roots, 

The home of years, facts 


3 

They have chosen stockings to cover their legs 
By a feeling for choices fine as air 
The appeal of stripes came to this one, 

And spots, diamonds, clocks, anchors, to others, 

The feeling for these choices was airy, fine. 

Born of the deliberation of childbirths. 

Thrust out with decision on the ends of their tongues 
If a black horse wishes white sox 
Or a white horse calls for tan footwear 
Or an ankle covering of pigeon blue gray— 

It is a balance bom of deliberations, childbirths 


MOON HAMMOCK 

When the moon was a hammock of gold. 

And the gold of the moon hammock kept changing 
Till there was a blood hammock of a moon— 

And the slow slipping down of it in the west, 

The idle easy slipping down of it 

Left a bridge of stars 

And marchers among the stars— 

That was an evening, a calendar date, 

A curve of lines in an almanac 

People said it was an hour in September or April 

The astronomers stood at the mirror angles 

Putting down another movement of the moon 

The same as so many other movements of the moon 

Put down m the big books of the regular watchers 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


407 


Of the moon This is the way things go by 
The gold hammock of a moon changes to blood, 

Slips down, leaves a bridge of stars, marchers, almanacs 


THIMBLE ISLANDS 

The sky and the sea put on a show 

Every day they put on a show 

There are dawn dress rehearsals 

There are sweet monotonous evening monologues 

The acrobatic lights of sunsets dwindle and darken 

The stars step out one by one with a bimbo, bimbo. 

The red ball of the sun hung a balloon m the west. 

And there was half a balloon, then no balloon at all, 

And ten stars marched out and ten thousand more, 

And the fathoms of the sky far over met the fathoms of the sea far 
under, among the thimble islands 

In the clear green water of dawn came a float of silver filaments, feelers 
circling a pink polyp’s mouth. 

The feelers ran out, opened and closed, opened and closed, hungry and 
searching, soft and incessant, floating the salt sea inlets sucking the 
green sea water as land roses suck the land air 

Frozen rock humps, smooth fire-rock humps— 

Thimbles on the thumbs of the wives of prostrate sunken 
giants— 

God only knows how many sleep m the slack of the 
seven seas 

There in those places 

under the sun balloons, 

and fathoms, filaments, feelers— 

The wind and the rain 
sew the years 

stitching one 5 ear into another 


4o8 


  


Heavy hammers and high blowouts 
take their pay, fill their contracts— 

And there are dawn dress rehearsals, sweet 
monotonous evening monologues 


CLEFS 

The little moon rode up a high corner 
The woman in a little room sat alone 
A violin the woman had sang for her 
The gut strings and the bow bent 
A series of clefs climbing for memories 
'Tor remembering,"' she said, "A little moon 
Up a high corner and climbing violin clefs " 


THE GREAT PROUD WAGON WHEELS GO ON 

The great proud wagon wheels 
go on Out of night and night's 
nothings a steel shaft, a white 
fire, a new star 

The great proud wagon wheels 
go on Out of night and night's 
nothings a proud head, a skull 
shape, a thing looking, a face 
and eyes 

The great proud wagon wheels 
go on Night again and night's 
nothings again and the star and 
the skull and face gone 

I wait I know Look^ The great 
proud wagon wheels go on Now 
what^ Now who^ coming 
out of night and night's nothings 
coming you^ and you? 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


409 


TALL TIMBER 

Night calls many witnesses 
to supply evidence, to report honestly, 
the meaning of dying, loving, being born 

Night has no better witnesses 

than tall timber, rich in a moon, roaming in mist, 

sweanng a corroboration of relevant circumstances 

Call others to the courthouses of earth, 

let them have counsel and all benefits of doubt, 

let them report all they have seen and heard 

Then let Night come into court 

The tall timber testifies, the moon, the mist, testify 

Let us hear the oaths of these unimpeachable witnesses 


PROUD TORSOS 

Just before the high time of autumn 
Comes with the crash of its touch. 

And the leaves fall, the leaves one by one. 
The leaves by a full darkening sky fall. 

The trees look proud, the horse chestnut 
Stands with a gathered pride, the ivies 
Are gathered around the stumps. 

The ivies are woven thick with a green coat 
Covermg the stumps Yes, the trees 
Look proud now, it is the big time 
Have they not all had summer? 

Didn’t they all flimmer with faint 
Lines of green in the spring, 

A thin green mist as if it might 
Be air or it might be new green leaves? 

So, the first weeks of September are on 
And each tree stands with a murmur. 


410 


  


'1 Stand here with a count of one more year, 
One more number, one more ring in my torso 
Two weeks, five, six weeks, and the trees 
Will be standing stripped gaunt 
The leaves gone the coat of green gone 
And they will be proud but no longer 
With the gathered pride of the days 
In the high time 


TO KNOW SILENCE PERFECTLY 

There is a music for lonely hearts nearly always 
If the music dies down there is a silence 
Almost the same as the movement of music 
To know silence perfectly is to know music 


sty Pieces 


SKY PIECES 

Proudly the fedoras march on the heads of the somewhat 
careless men 

Proudly the slouches march on the heads of the still more 
careless men 

Proudly the panamas perch on the noggins of dapper 
debonair men 

Comically somber the derbies gloom on the earnest solemn 
noodles 

And the sombrero, most proud, most careless, most dapper and debonair 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


411 


of all, somberly the sombrero marches on the heads of important 
men who know what they want 
Hats are skypieces, hats have a destiny, wish your hat 
slowly, your hat is you 


LOVABLE BABBLERS 

What did that old philosopher say^ 

“The deadest deaths are the best '' 

For he was the same who said to a friend 
When you cry I cry, when you shake hands with 
me and ease my luck telling me if s too 
bad and the world's all wrong, it melts 
something inside of me and I break down 
So there are babblers we love for what they are 


OOMBA 

OoMBA went along years 
Lugging a head 
On a pikestaff of human neck 
“It IS mine," said Oomba, 

“If it IS not mine who does it 
Belong to?" he asked, 

Oomba putting a straight quiz 
To Oomba himself 

“Here it is," he muttered, 

“Here on my neck, here on 
My pikestaff of human neck, 

And what is it for and how did I get it 
And why do I say it is mine 
And because it is mine it belongs to me?" 
So Oomba went on talking to Oomba 
Asking the simplest, oldest questions 
Of himself 



412 


  


SEVENTEEN MONTHS 

This girl child speaks five words 

No for no and no for yes, ''no'' for either 
no or yes 

"Teewee” for wheat or oats or corn or barley 
or any food taken with a spoon 

"Go way” as an edict to keep your distance 
and let her determinations operate 

"Spoon” for spoon or cup or anything to be handled, 
all instruments, tools, paraphernalia of utility 
and convenience are spoons 

Mama is her only epithet and synonym for God and the 
Government and the one force of majesty and in- 
telligence obeying the call of pity, hunger, pam, 
cold, dark— MAMA, mama, mama 


SARAH'S LETTER TO PETER 

When Sarah wrote Peter how she slept 
among silver leaf poplars, waking to see 
a light wind moving the under-side of the leaves— 

She told him how to the north and east 
there came a bath of light, a slow flush, 
and the larks shot out into the air, 
curved up and sang to meet the rose-red dawn 

But it wasn't dawn 

Four dark hours crept on till dawn arrived 
And the larks crept back to their nests 
And later met the dawn that came and stayed. 
Met it only with silence, with sore, dumb hearts 


Does every love have a false dawn? 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


4^3 


She wrote her lover 

Others are but the showers of April, whilst 
thou art the seven seas 

Making a rendezvous and then not keeping it is wrong 
Do not be a false dawn, I want thee forever 

And this was one of the chapters 


DESTROYERS 

Grandfather and grandfather's uncle stand looking at the harbor 'Took 
there," says grandfather, "and you see a torpedo boat Next to it is a tor- 
pedo boat destroyer And next to the torpedo boat destroyer is a destroyer 
of torpedo boat destroyers " 

And grandfather's uncle says, "I heard my grandfather's uncle say every 
echo has a destroyer and for every echo destroyer there is a destroyer of 
echo destroyers " 

And grandfather's uncle says, "I remember hearing my grandfather's uncle 
say every destroyer carries a pocket of eggs and the eggs wait and when 
they are ready they go blooey and the works of the destroyer blows up." 

So they stand looking at the harbor, grandfather a grand old gray-whisk- 
ered monochromic sea-dog and grandfather's uncle a grand old gray 
whiskered monochromic landlubber 

"Columbus," says grandfather, "Columbus was only a little dago, a ginny, 
a wop, and he changed the shape of the earth, before Columbus came 
the shape of the earth m the heads of men was square and flat and he 
made it round and round in the heads of men " 

"Yes," said grandfather's uncle, "he was bugs, he was loony, he saw 
things in a pig's eye, he had rats in his garret, bats in his belfry, there was 
a screw loose somewhere in him, he had a kink and he was a crank, he 
was nuts and belonged in a booby hatch " 

And the two grand old gray-whiskered monochromic men, one a sea-dog, 
the other a landlubber, laughed, laughed, laughed in each other’s sea- 
green, land-gray eyes 


414 


  


TWO WOMEN AND THEIR FATHERS 
1 

Her father was a policeman who went fishing summer Sundays and 
caught a carp once with an old Spanish com in its belly As for her she 
picks up a good living high in the air in pink tights on a trapeze working 
for Rmgling's circus 

2 

Her father wore hip rubber boots and stood in yellow clay digging a 
tunnel for street cais to dip under the Chicago river As for her she goes 
by a Hawaiian name and is known for a dance wherein she takes off one 
garment after another till there is a semblance of no garments at all 


VERY VERY IMPORTANT 

I HAVE no doubt that it is very important and so are you 

Put m two more of the word Very' as a prefix to the 
word 'important' if you like 

Make it read I have no doubt it is very very very im- 
portant and so are you 

Thus there are three of the word Very' standing in a row 
as prefixes to 'important' 

If you wish more of the word 'very' go to the same place 
these came from 


FOOLISH ABOUT WINDOWS 

I WAS foolish about windows 
The house was an old one and the windows 
were small 

I asked a carpenter to come and open the 
walls and put in bigger windows 
"The bigger the window the more it costs," 
he said 

"The bigger the cheaper," I said 
So he tore off siding and plaster and laths 
And put m a big window and bigger windows 
I was hungry for windows 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


4^5 


One neighbor said, “If you keep on you'll be 
able to see everything there is " 

I answered, “That'll be all right, that'll be 
classy enough for me " 

Another neighbor said, “Pretty soon your house 
will be all windows " 

And I said, “Who would the joke be on then'?^" 

And still another, “Those who live in glass 
houses gather no moss " 

And I said, “Birds of a feather should not throw 
stones and a soft answer turneth away rats " 


LOVE LETTER TO HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN 

The kitchen chair speaks to the bread knife, 

“Why have you no legs*!^" 

The bread knife answers, “And you no teeth?" 

It was a quarrel on a summer day 

It ran on till winter 

And on to another winter and another 

In the cellar ultimately 

The kitchen chair said, 

“Your teeth are gone," 

And the bread knife, 

“I see you have no legs " 

It was quiet in the cellar, they found, 

No yammering of people, no soup nor nuts, 

A pile of coal, old mops, and broken tools. 

These they could talk with and mostly 
None of them talked at all 


MYSTERIOUS BIOGRAPHY 

Christofo Colombo was a hungry man, 
hunted himself half way round the world; 
he began poor, panhandled, ended in jail, 
Christofo so hungry, Christofo so poor, 
Christofo in the chilly, steel bracelets, 
honorable distinguished Christofo Colombo. 


41 6 


  


RAT RIDDLES 

There was a gray rat looked at me 
with green eyes out of a rathole 

''Hello, rat,’' I said, 

"Is there any chance for me 

to get on to the language of the rats^” 

And the green eyes blinked at me, 
blinked from a gray rat’s rathole 

"Come again,” I said, 

"Slip me a couple of riddles, 

there must be nddles among the rats ” 

And the green eyes blinked at me 
and a whisper came from the gray rathole 
"Who do you think you are and why is a rat^ 
Where did you sleep last night and why do 
you sneeze on Tuesdays^ And why is the 
grave of a rat no deeper than the grave 
of a man?” 

And the tail of a green-eyed rat 
Whipped and was gone at a gray rathole. 


WINTER WEATHER 


It is cold 

The bitter of the winter 
whines a story 

It is the colder weather when the truck 
drivers smg it would freeze the whiskers 
off a brass monkey 

It is the bitterest whining of the winter 


now 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


417 


Well, we might sit down now, have a cup of coffee 

apiece, and talk about the weather 

We might look back on things that happened long 

ago, times when the weather was different 

Or we might talk about things ahead of us, funny 

things m the days, days, days to come, days when 

the weather will be different again 

Yes, a cup of coffee apiece 

Even if this winter weather is bitter. 

The truck drivers are laughing 

It would freeze the whiskers off a brass monkey 


THE DINOSAUR BONES 

The dinosaur bones are dusted every day 

The cards tell how old we guess the dinosaur 
bones are 

Here a head was seven feet long, horns with a 
hell of a ram. 

Humping the humps of the Montana mountains 
The respectable school children 

Chatter at the heels of their teacher who ex- 
plains 

The tourists and wonder hunters come with 
their parasols 

And catalogues and arrangements to do the 
museum 

In an hour or two hours 

The dinosaur bones 
are dusted 
every day 


UNINTENTIONAL PAINT 

The flat gray banana store front 

is visited by a union painter with no intentions 

and a bucket of high maroon paint 

and a pot of high yellow 


41 8 


  


The high maroon banana store front 
sings its contralto with two stripes 
of yellow soprano on the door 

The union painter meant nothing 
and we can not attribute intentions 
to a bucket of maroon nor a pot of yellow 

The door and the lintels sing 
Two banjos strum on the threshold 
Two people hum a snatch of song 
They know well from singing together often 
I must come this way often 
and not only for bananas 


PEOPLE OF THE EAVES, I WISH YOU GOOD MORNING 

The wrens have troubles like us The house of a wren will not run itself 
any more than the house of a man 

They chatter the same as two people in a flat where the laundry came back 
with the shirts of another man and the shimmy of another woman 

The shirt of a man wren and the shimmy of a woman wren are a trouble 
in the wren house It is this or something else back of this chatter a spring 
morning 

Trouble goes so quick in the wren house Now they are hopping wren jigs 
beaten off in a high wren staccato time 

People of the eaves, I wish you good morning, I wish you a thousand 
thanks 


WEDDING POSTPONED 

The arrangements are changed 
We were going to marry at six o'clock 
Now we shall not marry at all 


The bridegroom was all ready 

And the best man of the bridegroom was ready. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


4ig 


The bride fixed out in orchids and a long veil, 

The bride and six bridesmaids were all ready 

Then the arrangements changed 

The date was changed not from six o’clock till later 

The date was changed to no time at all, to never 

Why the arrangements were changed is a long story 
Tell half of it and it is better than nothing at all 
Tell it with a hint and a whisper and it is told wrong 

We know why it was put off, 

Why the arrangements shifted, 

Why the organist was told to go. 

Why the minister ready for the ring ceremony 
Was told to drive away and be quick about it, please 
We know this in all its results and circumstances 

The disappointment of the best man, 

The sorry look on the faces of the bridesmaids, 

We, who chose them out of many, we could understand 

And we told them only what is told here 
The arrangements are changed, there will be no wedding. 
We shall not marry at all, not today, not tomorrow, no 
time 


TWO WOMEN 

They told me in an old book 
about the wine-dark sea 

I saw the sea foam-lit and 
green, sunset-red and changing 

I saw the sea wine-dark only 
when I thought of you and your eyes 


The fabrics shift m her eyes 
Persian cat fur is soft. 



420 


  


A Navajo blanket beautifully woven, 
And IS there anything more restful 
than a Japanese sea-mist silk^ 
The fabrics shift in her voice 


SNATCH OF SLIPHORN JAZZ 

Are you happy? IPs the only 
way to be, kid 

Yes, be happy, iPs a good nice 
way to be 

But not happy-happy, kid, don't 
be too doubled-up doggone happy 
IPs the doubled-up doggone happy- 
happy people bust hard they 
do bust hard when they bust 

Be happy, kid, go to it, but not too 
doggone happy 


LANDSCAPE 

On a mountain-side the real estate agents 
Put up signs marking the city lots to be sold there 
A man whose father and mother were Irish 
Ran a goat farm half-way down the mountain. 

He drove a covered wagon years ago. 

Understood how to handle a rifle, 

Shot grouse, buffalo, Indians, in a single year, 

And now was raising goats around a shanty 

Down at the foot of the mountain 

Two Japanese families had flower farms 

A man and woman were in rows of sweet peas 

Picking the pink and white flowers 

To put in baskets and take to the Los Angeles market 

They were clean as what they handled 

There m morning sun, the big people and baby-faces 

Across the road high on another mountain 

Stood a house saying, '1 am it," a commanding house 

There was the home of a motion picture director 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


421 


Famous for lavish doll house interiors, 

Clothes ransacked from the latest designs for women 
In the combats of ''male against female '' 

The mountain, the scenery, the layout of the landscape, 

And the peace of the morning sun as it happened, 

The miles of houses pocketed in the valley beyond— 

It was all worth looking at, worth wondenng about. 

How long it might last, how young it might be 

[HOLLYWOOD, 1923^ 


DIFFERENT KINDS OF GOOD-BY 

Good-by is a loose word, a yellow nbbon 
fluttering m the wind 
Good-by is a stiff word, a steel slide rule— 
a fixed automatic phone number 
A thousand people? And you must say good-by 
to all? One at a time?— yes, I guess you 
need a thousand different good-bys 
There is a good-by for the Johnsons and another 
for the Smiths and another for the Poindexters 
and the Van Rensselaers 

And there is the big grand good-by to the thousand 
all at once, the whole works 


THREE HILLS LOOK DIFFERENT IN THE MOONSHINE 

The hill of the white skull m the summer moon 
shines, the hill of the red heart is a neighbor 
in the summer moonshine, the hill of the climbing 
clumsy shadows is another 


PROUD OF THEIR RAGS 

They come down from the mountains, proud of their rags 
"What do you know about loons, panthers, hawks? 
Wings, winds, shdes— what do you know? 



422 


  


Hunger and hope, and how do you know who tore my rags?'' 
They come down from the mountains, proud of their rags, 
five or SIX out of sixty, they come down with proud 
heads 


BROKEN SKY 

The sky of gray is eaten in six places, 
Rag holes stand out 
It IS an army blanket and the sleeper 
slept too near the fire 


HELLS AND HEAVENS 

Each man pictures his hell or heaven different 
Some have snug home-hke heavens, suburban, well-kept 
Some have a wild, storm-swept heaven, their happiness has 
been in storms, heaven must have storms mixed with 
fair weather 

And hell for some is a jail, for others a factory, for others 
a kitchen, for others a place of many polite liars full 
of blah, all gah gah 


THREE FRAGMENTS FOR FISHERS OF DESTINY 

Methusaleh was a witness to many cabbages and kings 

They marched in procession for him like the marching 
harvests of onions lift their green spears in Maytime 
and go down the wind in thistledown fluff with the 
leaves of October 

The same wind blew its crescendo and diminuendo in the 
long beards of clear-eyed prophets and again in the 
whiskers of the muddleheads who only called them- 
selves prophets 

Methusaleh saw the old muddleheads sniff at the sun 

And proclaim their wisdom as beyond the sun 


TiiMLlbeF Moon 


TIMBER MOON 

There is a way the moon looks into the timber at night 
And tells the walnut trees secrets of silver sand— 

There is a way the moon makes a lattice work 
Under the leaves of the hazel bushes— 

There is a way the moon understands the hoot owl 
Sitting on an arm of a sugar maple throwing its 
One long lonesome cry up the ladders of the moon — 
There is a way the moon finds company early m the fall- 
time 


FLOWERS TELL MONTHS 

Gold buttons in the garden today— 

Among the brown-eyed susans the golden spiders are 
gambling 

The blue sisters of the white asters speak to each other 

After the travel of the snows— 
Buttercups come in a yellow rain^ 
Johnny-]ump-ups in a blue mist— 

Wild azaleas with a low spring cry 


LANDSCAPE 

See the trees lean to the wind's way of learning. 
See the dirt of the hills shape to the water's 
way of learning 

See the lift of it all go the way the biggest 
wind and the strongest water want it. 




  


424 


COUNTING 

Sweet lips, there are songs about kisses now 
Looking backward are kisses of remembrance 
Looking ahead are kisses to be wished-for 
So time IS counted, so far back, so far ahead, in 
measurements of sweet kisses 


OAK ARMS 

The broken arm of the black oak 
blisters m the list of numbers 

“The sky hissed, I stand and remember” 

And the gold of the gloaming flushes, floods by. 
And the haze gold is cut across with the cricket’s 
wisp of Silver 


MOON PATH 

Creep up, moon, on the south sky 
Mark the moon path of this evening 
The day must be counted 
The new moon is a law 

The little say-so of the moon must be listened to 


THERE ARE DIFFERENT GARDENS 

Flowers can be cousins of the stars 
The closing and speaking lips of the lily 
And the warning of the fire and the dust— 
They are in the gardens and the sky of stars 
Beyond the shots of the light of this sun 
Are the little sprinkles, the httle twinklers 
Of suns to whose lips this lily never sent 
A whisper from its closing and speaking lips. 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


425 


WINDFLOWER LEAF 

This flower is repeated 
out of old winds, out of 
old times 

The wind repeats these, it 
must have these, over and 
over again 

New windflowers so fresh, 
oh beautiful leaves, here 
now again 

The domes over 
fall to pieces 
The stones under 
fall to pieces 
Ram and ice 
wreck the works 

The wind keeps, the windflowers 
keep, the leaves last, 

The wind young and strong lets 
these last longer than stones 


LITTLE SKETCH 

There are forked branches of trees 
Where the leaves shudder obediently. 
Where the hangover leaves 
Flow in a curve downward, 

And between the forks and leaves, 

In patches and angles, in square handfuls, 
The orange lights of the done sunset 
Come and filter and pour 




426 


  


BUTTER COLORS 

The light of the yellow flowers 
leaps to the light of the pool 

Butter under the chin of this slip 
slides to the level water mirror 

Fan yellow films of light play fast 
slipping all day on, on, to the water home 

Home, come home, water calls to light 
Fan yellow films leap and slide. 


WEBS 

Every man spins a web of light circles 

And hangs this web m the sky 

Or finds it hanging, already hung for him, 

Written as a path for him to travel 

The white spiders know how this geography goes 

Their feet tell them when to spin. 

How to weave in a criss-cross 

Among elms and maples, among radishes and button weeds. 

Among cellar timbers and old shanty doors 

Not only the white spiders, also the yellow and blue, 

Also the black and purple spiders 
Listen when their feet tell them to spin one 
And while every spider spins a web of light circles 
Or finds one already hung for him. 

So does every man bora under the sky 


PEACE, NIGHT, SLEEP 

'Tou shall have peace with night and sleep 
It was written in the creep of the mist. 

In the open doors of night horizons 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


427 


Peace, night, sleep, all go together 
In the forgetting of the frogs and the sun, 

In the losing of the grackle's off cry 

And the call of the bird whose name is gone — 

You shall have peace, the mist creeps, the doors open 
Let night, let sleep, have their way 


BUNDLES 

I HAVE thought of beaches, fields. 
Tears, laughter 

I have thought of homes put up— - 
And blown away 

I have thought of meetings and for 
Every meeting a good-by 

I have thought of stars going alone, 
Orioles in pairs, sunsets in blundering 
Wistful deaths 

I have wanted to let go and cross over 
To a next star, a last star 

I have asked to be left a few tears 
And some laughter 


MAN AND DOG ON AN EARLY WINTER MORNING 

There was a tall slough grass 

Too tough for the farmers to feed the cattle, 

And the wind was sifting through, shaking the grass, 

Each spear of grass interfered a little with the wind 
And the interference sent up a soft hiss, 

A mysterious little fiddler's and whistler's hiss. 

And it happened all the spears together 
Made a soft music in the slough grass 



428 


  


Too tough for the farmers to cut for fodder 
'This IS a proud place to come to 
On a winter morning, early m winter,'' 
Said a hungry man, speaking to his dog, 
Speaking to himself and the passing wind, 
'This IS a proud place to come to " 


PRECIOUS MOMENTS 

Bright vocabularies are transient as rainbows 
Speech requires blood and air to make it 
Before the word comes off the end of the tongue. 
While the diaphragms of flesh negotiate the word, 

In the moment of doom when the word forms 
It is born, alive, registering an imprint— 

Afterward it is a mummy, a dry fact, done and gone. 
The warning holds yet Speak now or forever hold 
your peace 

Ecce homo had meanings Behold the Man* Look at 
him! Dying he lives and speaks* 


OCTOBER PAINT 

Flame blue wisps in the west, 
Wrap yourselves in these leaves 
And speak to winter about us 
Tell winter the whole story 

Red leaves up the oaken slabs, 
You came, little and green spats 
Four months ago, your climbers 
Put scroll after scroll around 
The oaken slabs "Red, come red,'^ 
Some one with an October paint 
Pot said And here you are, 

Fifty red arrowheads of leaf paint 
Or fifty mystic fox footprints 
Or fifty pointed thumbprints 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


429 


Hold on, the winds are to come 
Blowing, blowing, the gray slabs 
Will lose you, the winds will 
Flick you away in a whiff 
One by one, two by two Yet 
I have heard a rumor whispered. 
Tattlers tell it to each other 
Like a secret everybody knows 
Next year you will come again 
Up the oaken slabs you will put 
Your pointed fox footprints 
Green in the early summer 
And you will be red arrowheads 
In the falltime Tattlers 
Slip this into each other's ears 
Like a secret everybody knows 
If I see some one with an 
October paint pot I shall be 
Full of respect and say, 

''I saw your thumbprints everywhere. 
How do you do it?'' 


MANY HATS 
1 

When the scrapers of the 
deep winds were done, and 
the haulers of the tall 
waters had finished, this 
was the accomplishment. 

The drums of the sun never 
get tired, and first off 
every morning, the drums of 
the sun perform an intro- 
duction of the dawn here 


The moon goes down here 
as a dark bellringer doing 


430 


  


once more what he has done 
over and over already in 
his young life 

Up on a long blue platform 
comes a line of starprmts 

If the wind has a song, it 
IS moaning, Good Lawd, I 
done done what you told me 
to do 


2 

Whose three-ring circus is this^ Who stipulated in a contract for this to 
be drunken, death-defying, colossal, mammoth, cyclopean, mystic as the 
light that never was on land or sea, bland, composed, and imperturbable 
as a cool phalanx of sphinxes? Why did one woman cry. The silence is 
terrible? Why did another smile, There is a sweet gravity here? Why do 
they come and go here and look as in a looking-glass? 

The Grand Canyon of Arizona, said one, this is it, hacked out by the 
broadax of a big left-handed God and left forgotten, fixed over and embel- 
lished by a remembering right-handed God who always comes back 

If you ask me, said an old railroader, Fll never tell you who took the exca- 
vation contract for this blowout— it took a lot of shovels and a lot of dyna- 
mite-several large kegs, I would guess— and maybe they had a case or two 
of TNT 

Yes, he went on, the Grand Canyon, the daddy of 'em all— the undisputed 
champeen— that range rider sure was righto— the elements had a hell of 
a rassle here 

The Grand Canyon— a long ride from where Brigham Young stands m 
bronze gazing on the city he bade rise out of salt and alkali— a weary walk 
from Santa Fe and the Mountains of the Blood of Christ— a bitter hike 
from where the Sonora dove at Tucson mourns. No hope, no hope— a 
sweet distance from where Balboa stripped for his first swim in the Pacific— 
a mean cross-country ]oumey to where Roy Bean told the muchacho. By 
the white light of a moon on the walls of an arroyo last Tuesday you killed 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


431 


a woman and next Tuesday we're going to hang you~a traveler's route 
of many days and sleeps to reach the place of the declaration, God reigns 
and the government at Washington lives 

Shovel into this cut of earth all past and present possessions, creations, 
belongings of man, shovel furioso, appassionata, pizzicato, shovel cities, 
wagons, ships, tools, jewels, the bottom isn't covered, the wild burros and 
the trail mules go haw-hee, haw-hee, haw-hee 

Turn it into a Hall of Fame, said a rambler, let it be a series of memo- 
nals to the Four Horsemen, to Napoleon, Carl the Twelfth, Caesar, Alex- 
ander the Great, Hannibal and Hasdrubal, and all who have rode in blood 
up to the bridles of the horses, calling. Hurrah for the next who goes— let 
each have his name on a truncated cyclops of rock— let passers-by say. He 
was pretty good but he didn’t last long 

Now I wonder, I wonder, said another, can they all find room here^ 
Elijah fed by the ravens, Jonah in the belly of the whale, Daniel in the 
lion's den. Lot's wife transmogrified into salt, Elijah riding up into the 
sky in a chariot of fire— can they all find room^ Are the broken pieces of 
the Tower of Babel and the Walls of Jericho here? Should I look for the 
ram's horn Joshua blew? 

3 

A phantom runner runs on the rim 'T saw a moon man throw hats in, 
hats of kings, emperors, senators, presidents, plumed hats of knights, red 
hats of cardinals, five-gallon hats of cowboys, tasselled hats of Bavarian 
yodelers, mandarin hats, derbies, fedoras, chapeaus, straws, lady picture 
hats out of Gainsborough portraits— 

''Hats many proud people handed over, dying and saying. Take this one 
too— hats furioso, appassionata, pizzicato— hats for remembrance, good-by, 
three strikes and out, fade me, there's no place to go but home — hats for 
man alone, God alone, the sky alone " 

4 

Think of the little birds, said another, the wee birdies— before God took 
a hunk of mud and made Man they were here, the birds, the robins, 
juncoes, nuthatches, bats, eagles, cedar birds, chickadees, bluejays, I saw 
a blackbird gleaming m satin, floating in the scrolls of his glamorous 
wings, stopping on an airpath and standing still with nothing under his 



  


432 

feet, looking at the gray Mojave desert level interrupted by the Grand 
Canyon — the birds belong, don^t they^ 

5 

Comes along a hombre saying, Let it be dedicated to Time, this is what 
IS left of the Big Procession when Time gets through with it, the sun 
loves its stubs, we will give a name to any torso broken and tumbled by 
Time, we will leave the vanished torsos with no names 

Comes along a hombre accidentally remarking. Let it be dedicated to Law 
and Order—the law of the Strong fighting the Strong, the Cunning out- 
witting the Less Cunning— and the Weak Ones ordered to their places by 
the Strong and Cunning— aye— and ai-ee — Law and Order 

Comes along another hombre giving his slant at it, Now this sure was the 
Gyarden of Eden, smooth, rich, nice, watered, fixed, no work till tomorrow, 
Adam and Eve satisfied and sitting pretty till the day of the Snake Dance 
and the First Sin, and God was disgusted and wrecked the works, he or- 
dered club-foot angels with broken wings to shoot the job, now look at it 

Comes another hombre all wised up, This was the DeviFs Brickyard, here 
were the kilns to make the Kitchens of Hell, after bricks enough were 
made to last Hell a million years, the Devil said, ''Shut 'er down'", they 
had a big payday night and left it busted from hell to breakfast, the Hopis 
looked it over and decided to live eighty miles away where there was water, 
then came Powell, Hance, the Santa F6, the boys shooting the rapids, and 
Fred Harvey with El Tovar 

6 

Now Hance had his points, they asked him how he come to find the 
Canyon and he told ’em, I was ridin’ old Whitey and the Mojaves after 
me when we comes to this gap miles across, I told Whitey, It’s you now 
for the longest jump you ever took, Whitey jumped and was half wav 
across when I pulled on the bridle, turned him around, and we come back 
to the same place on the Canyon nm we started from 

Yes, Hance told ’em, if they asked, how he come to dig the Canyon 
"But where did you put all the dirt?” "Took it away m wheelbarrows and 
made San Francisco Peaks ” 

Hance sleeping near a big rock, woke up and saw seven rattlesnakes circle 
seven times around the rock, each with the tail of the snake ahead in his 



GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


433 


mouth, and all of them swallowing, till after a while there wasn't a snake 
left Hance's wife got her leg caught between two rocks, couldn't get her 
loose, said Hance, so I had to shoot her to save her from starving to death, 
look down there between those two rocks and you can see her bones, said 
Hance 

This is where we find the original knuckle snake, he breaks to pieces if you 
try to pick him up, and when you go away he knuckles himself together 
again, yes, and down here, is the original echo canyon, we holler, '"Has 
Smith been here^" and the echo promulgates back, "Which Smith?" 

7 

Down at the darkest depths, miles down, the Colorado River grinds, toils, 
driving the channel deeper— is it free or convict?— tell me— will it end like 
a great writer crying, I die with my best books unwritten? 

Smooth as glass run the streaming waters— then a break into rapids, into 
tumblers, into spray, into voices, roars, growls, into commanding mono- 
tones that hunt far corners and )umping-off places. 

And how should a beautiful, ignorant stream of water know it heads for 
an early release— out across the desert, running toward the Gulf, below sea 
level, to murmur its lullaby, and see the Imperial Valley rise out of burn 
mg sand with cotton blossoms, wheat, watermelons, roses, how should it 
know? 

8 

The hombres keep coming, here comes another, he says, says he, I met 
four people this morning, the poker face, the baby stare, the icy mitt, and 
the peace that passeth understanding— let this place be dedicated to X, the 
unknown factor, to the Missing Link, to Jo Jo the dog-faced boy, to the 
Sargossa Sea, to Humpty Dumpty, to Little Red Riding Hood crying for 
her mother, to those who never believe in Santa Klaus, to the man who 
turned himself inside out because he was so sleepy 

9 

Steps on steps lift on into the sky, the lengths count up into stairways, let 
me go up for the Redeemer is up there. He died for me, so a Spanish 
Indian was speaking— and he asked. When the first French Jesuit looked 
from Yavapai four hundred years ago, did he murmur of a tall altar to go 
on a mile-long rock shelf down there on a mesa? did he whisper of an 



434 


  


unspeakably tall altar there for the raising of the ostensorium and the 
swinging of censers and the calling up of the presence of the Heart of the 
Living Christ? And he went on, Where the Son of God is made known 
surely is a place for the removal of shoes and the renewal of feet for the 
journey— surely this is so 

10 

Came a lean, hungry-looking hombre with Kansas, Nebraska, the Da- 
kotas on his wmd-bitten face, and he was saying. Sure my boy, sure my 
girl, and you're free to have any sweet bluebird fancies you please, any 
wild broncho thoughts you choose to have, when you stand before this 
grand scrap-pile of hats, hammers, haciendas, and hidalgos He went on. 
Yes, let this be dedicated to Time and Ice, a memorial of the Human 
Family which came, was, and went, let it stand as a witness of the short 
miserable pilgrimage of mankind, of flame faiths, of blood and fire, and 
of Ice which was here first and will be here again— Faces once frozen you 
shall all be frozen again— the little clocks of Man shall all be frozen and 
nobody will be too late or too early ever again 

11 

On the rim a quizzical gray-glintmg hombre was telling himself how it 
looked to him— the sun and the air are endless with silver tricks— the light 
of the sun has crimson stratagems— the changes go on in stop-watch split 
seconds— the blues slide down a box of yellow and mix with reds that melt 
into gray and come back saffron clay and granite pink— a weaving gamble 
of color twists on and it is anybody's guess what is next 

A long sand-brown shawl shortens to a glimmering turquoise scarf— as the 
parapets and chimneys wash over and out in the baths of the sunset and 
the floats of the gloaming, one man says. There goes God with an army 
of banners, and another man. Who is God and why? who am I and why? 

He told himself, This may be 
something else than what I 
see when I look— how do I 
know? For each man sees him- 
self in the Grand Canyon- 
each one makes his own Canyon 
before he comes, each one brings 
and carries away his own Canyon— 
who knows? and how do I know? 


GOOD MORNING, AMERICA 


435 


12 

If the wind has a song, it 
IS moaning Good Lawd, I 
done done what you told me 
to do 

When the scrapers of the 
deep winds were done, and 
the haulers of the tall 
waters had finished, this 
was the accomplishment 

The moon goes down here 
as a dark bellringer doing 
once more what he has done 
over and over already m 
his young life 

Up on a long blue platform 
comes a line of starprmts 

The drums of the sun never 
get tired, and first off 
every morning, the drums of 
the sun perform an intro- 
duction of the dawn here 




Being several stones and psalms nobody would 
want to laugh at 

interspersed with memoranda variations worth a 
second look 

along with sayings and yarns traveling on grief and 
laughter 

running sometimes as a fugitive air in the classic 
manner 

breaking into fig time and tap dancing nohow 
classical 

and further broken by plain and irregular sounds 
and echoes from 

the roar and whirl of street crowds, work gangs, 
sidewalk clamor, 

with interludes of midnight cool blue and inviolable 
stars 

over the phantom frames of skyscrapers 



DEDICATED 
TO CONTRIBUTORS 
DEAD AND LIVING 



Tte People, Yes 


1 

From the four corners of the earth, 
from corners lashed in wind 
and bitten with ram and fire, 
from places where the winds begin 
and fogs are born with mist children, 
tall men from tall rocky slopes came 
and sleepy men from sleepy valleys, 
their women tall, their women sleepy, 
with bundles and belongings, 
with little ones babbling, ''Where to now^ 
what next^"' 

The people of the earth, the family of man, 
wanted to put up something proud to look at, 
a tower from the flat land of earth 
on up through the ceiling into the top of the sky 

And the big job got going, 

the caissons and pilings sunk, 

floors, walls and winding staircases 

aimed at the stars high over, 

aimed to go beyond the ladders of the moon 

And God Almighty could have struck them dead 
or smitten them deaf and dumb 

And God was a whimsical fixer 
God was an understanding Boss 
with another plan m mind, 

439 



440 


  


And suddenly shuffled all the languages, 
changed the tongues of men 
so they all talked different 

And the masons couldn't get what the hodcarners said. 

The helpers handed the carpenters the wrong tools. 

Five hundred ways to say, "'Who are you^" 

Changed ways of asking, "Where do we go from here?" 

Or of saying, "Being bom is only the beginning," 

Or, "Would you just as soon sing as make that noise"?" 

Or, "Wliat you don't know won't hurt you " 

And the material-and-supply men started disputes 
With the hauling gangs and the building trades 
And the architects tore their hair over the blueprints 
And the brickmakers and the mule skinners talked back 
To the straw bosses who talked back to the superintendents 
And the signals got mixed, the men who shovelled the bucket 
Hooted the hoisting men— and the job was wrecked 

Some called it the Tower of Babel job 
And the people gave it many other names 
The wreck of it stood as a skull and a ghost, 
a memorandum hardly begun, 
swaying and sagging in tall hostile winds, 
held up by slow friendly winds 


2 

From Illinois and Indiana came a later myth 

Of all the people in the world at Howdeehow 

For the first time standing together 

From SIX continents, seven seas, and several archipelagoes. 

From points of land moved by wind and water 

Out of where they used to be to where they are, 

The people of the earth marched and travelled 
To gather on a great plain 

At a given signal they would join in a shout. 

So it was planned. 

One grand hosannah, something worth listening to 
And they all listened 
The signal was given 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


441 


And they all listened 
And the silence was beyond words 
They had come to listen, not to make a noise 
They wanted to hear 
So they all stood still and listened, 

Everybody except a little old woman from Kalamazoo 
Who gave out a long slow wail over what she was missing 
because she was stone deaf 

This IS the tale of the Howdeehow powpow, 

One of a thousand drolls the people tell of themselves. 
Of tall corn, of wide rivers, of big snakes. 

Of giants and dwarfs, heroes and clowns. 

Grown in the soil of the mass of the people 


3 

In the long flat panhandle of Texas 

far off on the grassland of the cattle country 

near noon they sight a rider coming toward them 

and the sky may be a cold neverchanging gray 

or the sky may be changing its numbers 

back and forth all day even and odd numbers 

and the afternoon slides away somewhere 

and they see their rider is alive yet 

their rider is coming nearer yet 

and they expect what happens and it happens again 

he and his horse ride m late for supper 

yet not too late 

and night is on and the stars are out 
and night too slides away somewhere 
night too has even and odd numbers 

The wind brings '"a norther"' 
to the long flat panhandle 
and in the shivering cold they say 

'‘Between Amanlla and the North Pole 
IS only a barbwire fence,” 
which they give a twist 

"Out here the only windbreak 
is the North Star” 




442 


  


4 

The people know what the land knows 

the numbers odd and even of the land 

the slow hot wind of summer and its withering 

or again the crimp of the driving white blizzard 

and neither of them to be stopped 

neither saying anything else than 

'Tm not arguing Fm telling you '' 

The old timer on the desert was gray 
and grizzled with ever seeing the sun 

'Tor myself I don't care whether it rains 

Fve seen it ram 

But Fd like to have it ram 

pretty soon sometime 

Then my son could see it 

He's never seen it rain " 

"Out here on the desert/' 

said the first woman who said it, 

"the first year you don't believe 
what others tell you 
and the second year you don't 
believe what you tell yourself " 

"I weave thee, I weave thee," 
sang the weaving Sonora woman 
"I weave thee, 
thou art for a Sonora fool " 

And the fool spoke of her, 

over wine mentioned her 

"She can teach a pair of stilts to dance " 

"What is the east? Have you been in the east?" 
the New Jersey woman asked the little girl 
the wee child growing up in Arizona who said 
"Yes, I've been in the east, 
the east is where trees come 
between you and the sky/' 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


443 


Another baby in Cleveland, Ohio, 
in Cuyahoga County, Ohio— 
why did she ask 

"Papa, 

what IS the moon 
supposed to advertise^'' 

And the boy in Winnetka, Illinois who wanted to know 
"Is there a tram so long you can't count the cars^ 

Is there a blackboard so long it will hold all the numbers?” 

What of the Athenian last year on whose bosom 
a committee hung a medal to say to the world 
here is a champion heavyweight poet^ 

He stood on a two-masted schooner 
and flung his medal far out on the sea bosom 
"And why not? 

Has anybody ever given the ocean a medals 
Who of the poets equals the music of the sea? 

And where is a symbol of the people 

unless it IS the sea?” 

"Is it far to the next town?” 
asked the Arkansas traveller 
who was given the comfort 

"It seems farther than it is 
but you’ll find it ain’t ” 

Six feet SIX was Davy Tipton 
and he had the proportions 
as kingpm Mississippi River pilot 
nearly filling the pilothouse 
as he took the wheel with a laugh 
"Big rivers ought to have big men ” 

On the homestretch of a racetrack 
m the heart of the bluegrass country 
m Lexington, Kentucky 
they strewed the ashes of a man 
who had so ordered in his will 


444 


  


He loved horses 
and wanted his dust 
in the flying hoofs of the homestretch 

5 

For sixty years the pine lumber barn 
had held cows, horses, hay, harness, tools, ]unk, 
amid the prairie winds of Knox County, Illinois 
and the corn crops came and went, plows and wagons, 
and hands milked, hands husked and harnessed 
and held the leather reins of horse teams 
in dust and dog days, in late fall sleet 
till the work was done that fall 
And the barn was a witness, stood and saw it all 
'That old barn on your place, Charlie, 
was nearly falling last time I saw it, 
how IS it now^” 

"I got some poles to hold it on the east side 
and the wind holds it up on the west '' 

6 

And you take hold of a handle 
by one hand or the other 
by the better or worse hand 
and you never know 
maybe till long afterward 
which was the better hand 

And you give an anecdote 
out of profound and moving forms of life 
and one says you're an odd bird to tell it 
and it was whimsical entertaining thank you 
while another takes it as a valentine 
and a fable not solved offhand 
a text for two hours talk and 
several cigars smoked-— 

You might say there never was a man who cut 
off his nose to spite his face. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


445 


Yet the cartoon stands for several nations 
and more than one ruler of a realm 
Likewise the man who burned his barn to get 
nd of the rats 

Or the woman who said her "'No” meant “Perhaps” 
and her ""Perhaps” meant ""Yes” 

Or Monte Cristo yes he was a case 

Monte Cristo had a list, a little roll call 

And one by one he took them each for a ride 

Saying One and Two and Three and so on 

Till the names were all crossed off 

And he had cleansed the world of a given number 

Of betrayers who had personally wronged him 

He was judge, jury, and executioner, 

On a par with Frankie who shot Johnnie, 

Only far colder than Frankie 
""He created a solitude 
and called it peace ” 

He was cold, sure, and what they call elevated. 
Meaning it was justice and not personal malice 
Handing out stiff death with regards, compliments, 
Calling each number like Nemesis in knickerbockers 
The show he put on was a little too good 
He was a lone wolf all on his own 
And Jesse James beat his record 
And John Brown was a far more profound sketch, 

John Brown who was locked up and didn't stay locked, 
John Brown who was buried deep and didn't stay so 

In a Colorado graveyard 
two men he in one grave 
They shot it out m a jam over who owned 
One corner lot over a piece of real estate 
They shot it out it was a perfect duel 
Each cleansed the world of the other 
Each horizontal in an identical grave 
Had his bones cleaned by the same maggots 
They sleep now as two accommodating neighbors. 

They had speed and no control 

They wanted to go and didn't know where 


446 


  


''Revenge takes time and is a lot of bother/' 
said a released convict who by the code 
of Monte Cristo should have shot twelve 
jurymen and hanged one judge and cruci- 
fied one prosecuting attorney and hung by 
thumbs two police oflScers and four prom- 
inent citizens 

"In my case/' he added, "it pays to have a 
good forgettery " 


7 

Neither wife nor child had Mr Eastman and the manner of his death 
was peculiar 

Around a fireplace in his home one night he entertained eight old friends, 
saying to one woman at the door at eleven o'clock, "I'm leaving 
you," she rejoining, "No, I'm leaving you " 

But Mr Eastman, the kodak king of exactly how many millions he 
wasn't sure, knew better as to whether he was leaving her or she him 
After a good night of sleep and breakfast he met two lawyers and a sec- 
retary, rearranging codicils in his will 
And when they lingered and delayed about going, he said, "You must 
be going, I have some writing to do," 

And they had a feeling, "Well, this is one of Mr Eastman's jokes, he 
has always had his odd pleasantries " 

And again Mr Eastman knew better than they that there was a little 
writing to be done and nobody else could do it for him 
They went— and Mr Eastman stepped into a bathroom, took his reliable 
fountain pen and scribbled on a sheet of paper 

"My work is finished Why wait?" 
He had counted the years one by one up to seventy-seven, had come 
through one paralytic stroke, had seen one lifelong friend reduced 
by a series of strokes to childish play at papercutting four years in 
bed and the integrity of the mind gone 
He had a guess deep in his heart that if he lived he might change his 
will, he could name cases, as the will now stood it was a keen dis- 
persal for science, music, research, and with a changing mind he 
might change his will 

Cool he was about what he was doing for he had thought about it along 
the slopes of the Genesee Valley of New York and along the coasts 
of Africa and amid babbling apes of the jungle 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


447 


He inspects in the bathroom an automatic revolver, a weapon tested 
and trusted, loaded, oiled, operating 
He takes a towel and wets it, placing it over the heart, the idea being that 
in case he shoots himself there will be no soot nor splatter and a 
clean piece of workmanship 

His preparations are considered and thorough and he knows the credit 
for the deed can never possibly go to anyone but himself 
Then he steps out, the hammer falls, he crosses over, takes the last barrier 
He knows thereafter no console organist will call of a morning to play 
Bach or Handel while he eats breakfast 
His last testament stands secure against the childishness of second child 
hood 


8 

Mildred Klinghofer whirled through youth in bloom 

One baby came and was taken away, another came and was taken away 

From her windows she saw the cornrows young and green 

And later the final stand of the corn and the huddled shocks 

And the blue mist of a winter thaw deepening at evening 

In her middle forties her first husband died 

In her middle sixties her second husband died 

In her middle seventies her third husband died 

And she died at mid-eighty with her fourth husband at the bedside 

Thus she had known an editor, a lawyer, a grocer, a retired farmer 

To the first of them she had borne two children she had hungered for 

And deep in her had stayed a child hunger 

In the last hours when her mind wandered, she cried imperiously, ''My 
baby^ give me my baby*'" 

And her cries for this child, born of her mind, in her final moments of 
life, went on and on 

When they answered, "Your baby isn't here" or "Your baby is coming 
soon if you will wait," she kept on with her cry, "My baby’ let me 
hold my baby’" 

And they made a rag doll 
And laid it m her arms 
And she clutched it as a mother would 

And she was satisfied and her second childhood ended like her first, 
with a doll m her arms 

There are dreams stronger than death 
Men and women die holding these dreams 




448 


  


Yes, ''stronger than death'" let the hammers beat on this slogan 
Let the sea wash its salt against it and the blizzards drive wind and winter 
at it 

Let the undersea sharks try to break this bronze murmur 
Let the gentle bush dig its root deep and spread upward to split one boul- 
der 

Blame the frustrate^ Some of them have lived stronger than death 
Blame only the smug and scrupulous beyond reproach 
Who made the guess Shakespeare died saying his best plays didn't get 
written^ 

Who swindles himself more deeply than the one saying, "I am holier than 
thou"? 


"I love you," 
said a great mother 
"I love you for what you are 
knowing so well what you are 
And I love you more yet, child, 
deeper yet than ever, child, 
for what you are going to be, 
knowing so well you are going far, 
knowing your great works are ahead, 
ahead and beyond, 
yonder and far over yet " 


9 

A FATHER sees a son nearing manhood 
What shall he tell that son? 

"Life is hard, be steel, be a rock " 

And this might stand him for the storms 
and serve him for humdrum and monotony 
and guide him amid sudden betrayals 
and tighten him for slack moments, 

"Life IS a soft loam, be gentle, go easy " 

And this too might serve him 
Brutes have been gentled where lashes failed 
The growth of a frail flower m a path up 
has sometimes shattered and split a rock. 

A tough will counts So does desire 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


449 


So does a rich soft wanting 
Without rich wanting nothing arrives 
Tell him too much money has killed men 
and left them dead years before burial 
the quest of lucre beyond a few easy needs 
has twisted good enough men 
sometimes into dry thwarted worms 
Tell him time as a stuff can be wasted 
Tell him to be a fool every so often 
and to have no shame over having been a fool 
yet learning something out of every folly 
hoping to repeat none of the cheap follies 
thus arriving at intimate understanding 
of a world numbering many fools 
Tell him to be alone often and get at himself 
and above all tell himself no lies about himself 
whatever the white lies and protective fronts 
he may use amongst other people 
Tell him solitude is creative if he is strong 
and the final decisions are made in silent rooms 
Tell him to be different from other people 
if it comes natural and easy being different 
Let him have lazy days seeking his deeper motives 
Let him seek deep for where he is a born natural. 
Then he may understand Shakespeare 
and the Wright brothers, Pasteur, Pavlov, 
Michael Faraday and free imaginations 
bringing changes into a world resenting change 
He will be lonely enough 
to have time for the work 
he knows as his own 


1 0 

The Australian mounted infantryman now teaches 
m a western state college 
Once he studied at the University of Heidelberg 
and took a doctor's degree 
Once he slept on newspapers, pink sheets, three 
weeks m Grant Park, Chicago 


450 


  


Keeping a tight hold on his certificate awarded 
by the University of Heidelberg 
Once he lived six weeks in a tent looking m the 
face the Great Sphinx of Egypt 
Once of a morning shaving he happened to ask the 
battered and worndown Sphinx^ 

*'What would you say if I should ask you to tell 
me something worth telling^'' 

And the Sphinx broke its long silence 

''Don't expect too much " 


1 1 

An Englishman in the old days 
presented the Empress of Russia 
with a life-sized flea made of gold 
and it could hop 

She asked the court 
"What can we Russians do 
to equal this marvel^" 

A Minister took it away 
and brought it back soon after 
He had seen to it 

and had the monogram of the Empress 
engraved on each foot of the flea 
though it would no longer hop 

This IS a case in point 

as told by Salzman 

who came from the Caucasus 

and had it from a man who was there 

In Tiflis, his home town, 

Salzman knew a merchant 
who stood m the front door 
and spoke to passers-by, 
to possible customers 
"Come inside. 



THE PEOPLE^ YES 


45^ 


WeVe got everything— 
even bird's milk " 

And this merchant weighed his hand 
along with what he sold his patrons 
and each evening after business hours 
he threw holy water on his hand 
saying, ''Cleanse thyself, cleanse thyself '' 

Among the peasants Salzman heard 
"He should be the owner of the land 
who rubs it between his hands every spring 

Wood rangers in the forest of the czar 
came m and talked all night 
They spoke of forest sounds 
"The cry of a virgin tree at its first cut 
of the ax stays in the air 
"The sound of the blow that kills a snake 
IS in the air till sundown 
"The cry of the child wrongfully punished 
stays in the air/’ 

And this was in the old days 
and they are a fine smoke 
a thin smoke 

The people move 
in a fine thin smoke, 
the people, yes 


1 2 

The scaffolding holds the arch in place 
till the keystone is put in to stay 
Then the scaffolding comes out 
Then the arch stands strong as all the 
massed pressing parts of the arch 
and loose as any sag or spread 
failing of the builders’ intention, hope 



452 


  


'The arch never sleeps 
Living in union it holds 
So long as each piece does its work 
the arch is alive, singing, a restless choral 


1 3 

The outstraw green turns gold turns ashen and 
prepares for snow 

The earth and the grass hold grand international 
confabulations with the sun 
Along the Arkansas or the Po grass testifies to 
loam of earth alive yet 

The rivers of the earth run into the sea, return 
m fog and rain alive yet 
The shuttlmgs go on between field and sky and 
keep corn potatoes beans alive yet 
The Illinois corn leaves spoken to m high winds 
run in sea waves of sun silver 
Alive yet the spillover of last nighf s moonrise 
brought returns of peculiar cash 
a cash of thin air alive yet 

On the shores of Lake Michigan 
high on a wooden pole, in a box, 
two purple martins had a home 
and taken away down to Martinique 
and let loose, they flew home, 
thousands of miles to be home again 
And tins has lights of wonder 
echo and pace and echo again 
The birds let out began flying 
north north-by-west north 
till they were back home 
How their instruments told them 
of ceiling, temperature, air pressure, 
how their control-boards gave them 
reports of fuel, ignition, speeds, 
is out of the record, out 
Across spaces of sun and cloud, 
in ram and fog, through air pockets, 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


453 


Wind with them, wind against them, 
stopping for subsistence rations, 
whirling in gust and spiral, 
these people of the air, 
these children of the wind, 
had a sense of where to go and how, 
how to go north north-by-west north, 
till they came to one wooden pole, 
till they were home again 
And this has lights of wonder 
echo and pace and echo again 
for other children, other people, yes 

The red ball of the sun in an evening mist 
Or the slow fall of ram on planted fields 
Or the pink sheath of a newborn child 
Or the path of a child's mouth to a nipple 
Or the snuggle of a bearcub in mother paws 
Or the structural weave of the universe 
Witnessed m a moving frame of winter stars— 
These hold affidavits of struggle 

14 

The people is Everyman, everybody 
Everybody is you and me and all others 
What everybody says is what we all say 
And what is it we all say? 

Where did we get these languages? 

Why IS your baby-talk deep m your blood? 

What IS the cling of the tongue 
To what it heard with its mother-milk? 

They cross on the ether now 

They travel on high frequencies 

Over the border-lines and bamers 

Of mountain ranges and oceans 

When shall we all speak the same language? 

And do we want to have all the same language? 

Are we learning a few great signs and passwords? 



454 


  


Why should Everyman be lost for words^ 

The questions are put every day in every tongue 
'Where you from, Stranger? 

Where were you born? 

Got any money? 

What do you work at? 

Where's your passport? 

Who are your people?'' 

Over the ether crash the languages 
And the people listen 
As on the plain of Howdeehow they listen 
They want to hear 

They will be told when the next war is ready 

The long wars and the short wars will come on the air, 

How many got killed and how the war ended 

And who got what and the price paid 

And how there were tombs for the Unknown Soldier, 

The boy nobody knows the name of, 

The boy whose great fame is that of the masses, 

The millions of names too many to write on a tomb, 

The heroes, the cannonfodder, the living targets. 

The mutilated and sacred dead, 

The people, yes 

Two countries with two flags 
are nevertheless one land, one blood, one people- 
can this be so? 

And the earth belongs to the family of man? 
can this be so? 

The first world war came and its cost was laid on the people. 
The second world war— the third— what will be the cost? 
And will it repay the people for what they pay? 

1 5 

From the people the countries get their armies 
By the people the armies are fed, clothed, armed 
Out of the smoke and ashes of the war 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


455 


The people build again their two countries with two flags 
Even though sometimes it is one land, one blood, one people 

Hate IS a vapor fixed and mixed 
Hate IS a vapor blown and thrown 
And the war lasts till the hate dies down 
And the crazy Four Horsemen have handed the people 
Hunger and filth and a stink too heavy to stand 
Then the earth sends forth bright new grass 
And the land begins to breathe easy again 
Though the hate of the people dies slow and hard 
Hate is a lingering heavy swamp mist 

And the bloated horse carcass points four feet to the sky 
And the tanks and caterpillar tractors are buried deep in shell holes 
And rust flakes the big guns and time rots the gas masks on skeleton faces 
Deep in the dirt the dynamite threw them with an impersonal detonation 
war is "Oh»^^ and ^^Ahi^' war is ^^Ugh»" 

And after the stnfe of war 
begins the stnfe of peace 

1 6 

Hope is a tattered flag and a dream out of time 

Hope is a heartspun word, the rainbow, the shadblow in white, 

The evening star inviolable over the coal mines, 

The shimmer of northern lights across a bitter winter night, 

The blue hills beyond the smoke of the steel works. 

The birds who go on singing to their mates in peace, war, peace. 

The ten-cent crocus bulb blooming in a used-car salesroom, 

The horseshoe over the door, the luckpiece in the pocket. 

The kiss and the comforting laugh and resolve— 

Hope is an echo, hope ties itself yonder, yonder 

The spring grass showing itself where least expected. 

The rolling fluff of white clouds on a changeable sky. 

The broadcast of strings from Japan, bells from Moscow, 

Of the voice of the prime minister of Sweden carried 
Across the sea m behalf of a world family of nations 


456 


  


And children singing chorals of the Christ child 
And Bach being broadcast from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania 
And tall skyscrapers practically empty of tenants 
And the hands of strong men groping for handholds 
And the Salvation Army singing God loves us 

17 

'The people is a myth, an abstraction 

And what myth would you put in place 
of the people^ 

And what abstraction would you exchange 
for this one^ 

And when has creative man not toiled 
deep in myth? 

And who fights for a bellyful only and 

where is any name worth remembering 
for anything else than the human ab- 
straction woven through it with in- 
visible thongs? 

"Precisely who and what is the people?"' 

Is this far off from asking what is grass? 
what IS salt? what is the sea? what is 
loam? 

What are seeds? what is a crop? why must 
mammals have milk soon as born or they 
perish? 

And how did that alfalfaland governor 

mean it "The common people is a mule 
that will do anything you say except 
stay hitched"? 


1 8 

Let the nickels and dimes explain 

They are made for the people 

Millions every day study the buffalo on the nickel. 

Study the torch of liberty on the dime 

And the words "In God We Trust," 

Study before spending the nickel, the dime, 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


457 


For a handkerchief, a mousetrap, a bowl of soup 
These with their nickels and dimes 
Bring the street its roar and whirl. 

These in their wants and spending. 

These are the bottom pedestals of steel-ribbed skyscrapers 

These are the buyers and payers whose mass flood of nickels 
and dimes is a life stream of a system 

And how come the hey-you- 

-hsten-to-this billboard, the you-can't- 
-get-away-from-this electric sign, the 
show window robots and dummies, the loud- 
speaker clamor, the bargains brandished 
with slambang hoots and yells, nods and 
winks, gee-whizz sales^ 

The liar in print who first lies to you 

about your health and then lies about 
what will fix it, the scare liar who hopes 
his lies will scare you into buying what 
he is lying about. 

The better-than-all-others liar, the easy-pay- 
ments liar, the greatest-on-earth liar, the 
get-rich-quick liar 

Befouling words and mutilating language and 

feeding rubbish and filth to the human mind 
for the sake of sales, selling whatever can 
be sold for a profit— 

Out of this seething whirl, this merciless fight 
of the selling game, what happens to buyers 
and sellers^ why does the question rise 

''How can you compete with a skunk?'" 

The endless lines of women buying steel-wool dishrags are among the 
people, the customers, the mass buyers who pay 

For the barons and counts the American girl goes shopping for, trying 
one and another 

"What is doing in dukes today and how much for a marquis a markee?" 
asks the chain store princess, the daughter of the railroad reorgani- 
zation looter. 

While the shoppers and commuters who constitute their meal tickets 


458 


  


pick the aisles amid frying pans, flannelette apparel, leatherette 
notions, genuine toys and imitation jewelry 

Out of the needs of life and the wants of the people rises a jungle of 
tall possessions bewildering to its owners and their sons and daugh- 
ters who step m when the will is read and say, ''Now ifs ours '' 
From then on the bank and its branches appurtenant thereto, the mills 
and mines, the patents, the oil wells and pipe lines, the monopoly 
rights, the coast-to-coast chain of stores, belong to the new gen- 
eration. 

To a daughter sometimes nothing special, just another cutie, to a son who 
knows neckties and chorines and wisecracks at parting, "Abyssinia 
Out of this rigamarole come czars of definite domains, owners of control 
saying, "We don't have to own it What's ownership anyhow if we 
hold control and the affiliates and subsidiaries of the mam holding 
company are fixed our way^" 


1 9 

The people, yes, the people. 

Everyone who got a letter today 
And those the mail-camer missed. 

The women at the cookstoves preparing meals, 
in a sewing corner mending, in a basement 
laundering, woman the homemaker. 

The women at the factory tending a stitching 
machine, some of them the mainstay of the 
jobless man at home cooking, laundering. 
Streetwalking jobhunters, walkers alive and keen, 
sleepwalkers drifting along, the stupefied and 
hopeless down-and-outs, the game fighters 
who will die fighting, 

Walkers reading signs and stopping to study 
windows, the signs and windows aimed 
straight at their eyes, their wants, 

Women in and out of doors to look and feel, to 
try on, to buy and take away, to order and 
have it charged and delivered, to pass by on 
account of price and conditions. 

The shopping crowds, the newspaper circulation. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


459 


the bystanders who witness parades, who 
meet the boat, the tram, who throng in 
wavehnes to a fire, an explosion, an accident— 
The people, yes— 

Their shoe soles wearing holes in stone steps, their 
hands and gloves wearing soft niches in ban- 
isters of granite, two worn foot-tracks at the 
general-delivery window. 

Driving their cars, stop and go, red light, green 
light, and the law of the traffic cop's fingers, 
on their way, loans and mortgages, margins to 
cover. 

Payments on the car, the bungalow, the radio, the 
electric icebox, accumulated interest on loans 
for past payments, the writhing point of 
where the money will come from, 

Crime thrown m their eyes from every angle, 
crimes against property and person, crime in 
the prints and films, crime as a lurking 
shadow ready to spring into reality, crime as 
a method and a technic. 

Comedy as an offset to crime, the laughmakers, 
the odd numbers m the news and the movies, 
original clowns and imitators, and in the best 
you never know what's coming next even 
when it's hokum. 

And sports, how a muff in the seventh lost yes- 
terday's game and now they are learning to 
hit Dazzy's fadeaway ball and did you hear 
how Foozly plowed through that line for a 
touchdown this afternoon^ 

And daily the death toll of the speed wagons, a 
cripple a minute in fenders, wheels, steel and 
glass splinters, a stammering witness before a 
coroner's jury, 'It happened sa sudden I 
don't know what happened " 

And in the air a decree life is a gamble, take a 
chance, you pick a number and see what you 
get anything can happen in this sweepstakes 
around the corner may be prosperity or the 


460 


  


worst depression yet who knows? nobody 
you pick a number, you draw a card, you 
shoot the bones 

In the poolrooms the young hear, "'Ashes to 
ashes, dust to dust, If the women don't get 
you then the whiskey must,” and in the 
churches, "We walk by faith and not by sight,” 
Often among themselves in their sessions of can- 
dor the young saying, "Everything's a racket, 
only the gyp artists get by ” 

And over and beyond the latest crime or comedy 
always that relentless meal ticket saying 
dont-lose-me, hold your ]ob, glue your mind 
on that ]ob or when your last nickel is gone 
you live on your folks or sign for relief, 

And the terror of these unknowns is a circle of 
black ghosts holding men and women in toil 
and danger, and sometimes shame, beyond 
the dreams of their blossom days, the days 
before they set out on their own 
What IS this "occupational disease” we hear 

about? It's a sickness that breaks your health 
on account of the work you're in That's all 
Another kind of work and you'd have been 
as good as any of them You'd have been 
your old self 

And what is this "hazardous occupation”? Why 
that's where you're liable to break your neck 
or get smashed on the job so you're no good 
on that job any more and that's why you 
can't get any regular life insurance so long as 
you're on that job 

These are heroes then— among the plain people— 
Heroes, did you say? And why not? They 
give all they've got and ask no questions and 
take what comes and what more do you 
want? 

On the street you can see them any time, some 
with jobs, some nothing doing, here a down- 
and-out, there a game fighter who will die 
fighting 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


461 


20 

Who shall speak for the people^ 

Who knows the works from A to Z 
so he can say, “I know what the 
people want"'? Who is this phenom? 
where did he come from? 

When have the people been half as rotten 
as what the panderers to the people 
dangle before crowds? 

When has the fiber of the people been as 
shoddy as what is sold to the people 
by cheaters? 

What IS it the panderers and cheaters of 
the people play with and trade on? 

The credulity of believers and hopers— and 
when IS a heart less of a heart because 
of belief and hope? 

What IS the tremulous line between credu- 
lity on the one side and on the other 
the hypotheses and illusions of inven- 
tors, discoverers, navigators who chart 
their course by what they hope and 
believe is beyond the horizon? 

What IS a stratosphere fourteen miles from 
the earth or a sunken glass house on 
the sea-bottom amid fish and feather- 
stars unless a bet that man can shove 
on beyond yesterday's record of man 
the hoper, the believer? 

How like a sublime sanctuary of human 
credulity is that room where amid 
tubes, globes and retorts they shoot 
with heavy hearts of hydrogen and 
batter with fire-streams of power hop- 
ing to smash the atom 

Who are these bipeds trying to take apart 
the atom and isolate its electrons and 
make it tell why it is what it is? Be- 
hevers and hopers 



462 


  


Let the work of their fathers and elder 
brothers be cancelled this instant and 
what would happen^ 

Nothing— only every tool, bus, car, light, 
torch, bulb, print, film, instrument or 
communication depending for its life 
on electrodynamic power would stop 
and stand dumb and silent 


2 1 

Who knows the people, the migratory harvest hands and berry pickers, 
the loan shark victims, the installment house wolves. 

The jugglers in sand and wood who smooth their hands along the mold 
that casts the frame of your motorcar engine. 

The metal polishers, solderers, and paint-spray hands who put the final 
finish on the car. 

The riveters and bolt-catchers, the cowboys of the air m the big city, the 
cowhands of the Great Plains, the ex-convicts, the bellhops, redcaps, 
lavatory men— 

The union organizer with his list of those ready to join and those hesi- 
tating, the secret paid informers who report every move toward or- 
ganizing. 

The house-to-house canvassers, the doorbell ringers, the good-morning- 
have-you-heard boys, the strike pickets, the strikebreakers, the hired 
sluggers, the ambulance crew, the ambulance chasers, the picture 
chasers, the meter readers, the oysterboat crews, the harborhght 
tenders— 

who knows the people^ 

Who knows this from pit to peak? The people, yes 

22 

The people is a lighted believer and 

hoper— and this is to be held against 
them? 

The panderers and cheaters are to have 
their way in trading on these hghts 
of the people? 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


463 


Not always, no, not always, for the people 
IS a knower too 

With Johannson steel blocks the people 
can measure itself as a knower 
Knowing what it knows today with a deeper 
knowing than ever 

Knowing in millionths and billionths of 
an inch 

Knowing in the mystery of one automatic 
machine expertly shaping for your eyes 
another automatic machine 
Knowing m traction, power-shafts, transmis- 
sion, twist drills, grinding, gears— 
Knowmg in the night air mail, the news- 
reel flicker, the broadcasts from Tokyo, 
Shanghai, Bombay and Somaliland— 
The people a knower whose knowing 
grows by what it feeds on 
The people wanting to know more, wanting 
The birds of the air and the fish of the sea 
leave off where man begins 


23 

“The kindest and gentlest here are the 

murderers,” said the penitentiary warden 
“I killed the man because I loved him,” 

said the woman the police took yesterday 
“I had such a good time,” said the woman leaving a movie theater with 
tears m her eyes “It was a swell picture ” 

“A divorced man goes and marries the same kind of a woman he is just 
rid of,” said the lawyer 

“Life IS a gigantic fake,” read the farewell note of the high school boy 
who killed himself 

“I pick jurors with nonconvicting faces,” 

said the lawyer who usually cleared his man 
“We earn and we earn and all that we earn goes into the grave,” said the 
basement-dwelling mother who had lost six of her eight children from 
the white plague 

“Don’t mourn for me but organize,” said the Utah I W W before a finng 



464 


  


squad executed sentence of death on him, his last words running 
'Xet her go^"' 

''Look out or you'll be ready for one of these one-man bungalows with 
Silver handles," laughed the traffic cop 
"Tie your hat to the saddle and let's ride," 

yelled one in a five-gallon hat in Albuquerque 
"If I never see you again don't think the time long," smiled an old timer 
in Wyoming moonlight 

On tiptoe and whispering so no one else could hear, a little girl at Browns- 
ville spoke into the ear of the chief executive of the great State of 
Texas "How does it feel to be Governor^" 

Why when the stock crash came did the man in black silk pajamas let 
himself headfirst off a fire escape down ten floors to a stone sidewalk? 
His sixty million dollars had shrunk to ten million and he didn't see 
how he could get along 

"If she was a wicked witch she wouldn't say so, she would be so wicked 
she wouldn't know it," said little Anne 
"God will forgive me, it's his line of business," 

said the dying German-Jewish poet m his garret 

The little girl saw her first troop parade and asked, 

"What are those?" 

"Soldiers " 

"What are soldiers?" 

"They are for war They fight and each tnes to kill 
as many of the other side as he can " 

The girl held still and studied 

"Do you know I know something?" 

"Yes, what is it you know?" 

"Sometime they'll give a war and nobody will come " 

One of the early Chicago poets, 

One of the slouching underslung Chicago poets. 

Having only the savvy God gave him, 

Lacking a gat, lacking brass knucks, 

Having one lead pencil to spare, wrote 

"I am credulous about the destiny of man, 
and I believe more than I can ever prove 
of the future of the human race 
and the importance of illusions. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


465 


the value of great expectations 
I would like to be in the same moment 
an earthworm (which I am) and 
a rider to the moon (which I am) 

24 

Who shall speak for the people^ 
who has the answers? 
where is the sure interpreter^ 
who knows what to say^ 

Who can write the music jazz-classical 

smokestacks-geramums hyacinths-biscuits 
now whispering easy 
now boom doom crashing angular 
now tough monotonous tom tom 
Who has enough split-seconds and slow sea-tides^ 

The ships of the sea and the mists of 
night and the sheen of old battle- 
fields and the moon on the city 
rubbish dumps belong to the people 
The crops this year, last and next year, 
and the winds and frosts in many 
orchards and tomato gardens, are 
listed in the people's acquaintance 
Horses and wagons, trucks and tractors, 
from the shouting cities to the sleep- 
ing prairies, from worn pavements 
to mountain mule paths, the people 
have strange possessions 
The plow and the hammer, the knife and 
the shovel, the planting hoe and the 
reaping sickle, everywhere these are 
the people's possessions by right of 
use 

Their handles are smoothed to the grain 
of the wood by the enclosing 
thumbs and fingers of familiar 
hands. 


466 


  


Mamtenance-of-way men in a Tennessee 
gang singing, I die a railroad 
man put a pick and shovel at my 
head and my feet and a nine-pound 
hammer in my hand,’' 

Larry, the Kansas section boss, on his 
dying bed asking for one last look at 
the old hand-car, 

His men saying in the coffin on his chest 
he should by rights have the spike 
maul, the gauge and the old claw-bar 

The early morning in the fields, the 
brown thrush warbling and the imi- 
tations of the catbird, the neverend- 
ing combat with pest and destroyer, 
the chores of feeding and watching, 
seedtime and harvest. 

The clocking of the months toward a 
birthing day, the newly dropped 
calves and the finished steers loaded 
in stock-cars for market, the gamble 
on what we’ll get tomorrow for 
what we put m today— 

These are belongings of the people, dusty 
with the dust of earth, merciless as 
sudden hog cholera, hopeful as a 
rainwashed hill of moonlit pines 

2 5 

“You do what you must— this world and then the next— one world at a 
time ” 

The gram gamblers and the pnce manipulators and the stock-marhet 
players put their own twist on the text In the sweat of thy brow shalt 
thou eat thy bread 

The day’s work m the factory, mill, mine— the whistle, the bell, the alarm 
clock, the timekeeper and the paycheck, your number on the assembly 
line, what the night shift sajs when the day shift comes— the blood 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


467 


of years paid out for finished products proclaimed on billboards yell- 
ing at highway travellers in green valleys — 

These are daily program items, values of blood and mind in the everyday 
rituals of the people 

26 

You can drum on immense drums 
the monotonous daily motions of the people 
taking from earth and air 
their morsels of bread and love, 
a carryover from yesterday into tomorrow 

You can blow on great brass horns 

the awful clamors of war and revolution 

when swarming anonymous shadowshapes 

obliterate old names Big Names 

and cross out what was 

and offer what is on a fresh blank page 

27 

In the folded and quiet yesterdays 
Put down in the book of the past 
Is a scrawl of scrawny thumbs 
And a smudge of clutching fingers 
And the breath of hanged men, 

Of thieves and vagabonds, 

Of killers saying welcome as an ax fell. 

Of traitors cut m four pieces 
And their bowels thrust over their faces 
According to the ancient Anglo-Saxon 
Formula for the crime of treason. 

Of persons covered with human filth 
In due exaction of a penalty. 

Of ears clipped, noses slit, fingers chopped 
For the identification of vagrants. 

Of loiterers and wanderers seared 

“with a hot iron in the breast the mark V,” 

Of violence as a motive lying deep 
As the weather changes of the sea. 


468 


  


Of gang wars, tong wars, civil tumults, 

Industrial strife, international mass murders, 

Of agitators outlawed to live on thistles, 

Of thongs for holding plainspoken men, 

Of thought and speech being held a crime, 

And a woman burned for saying, 

listen to my Voices and obey them,'' 

And a thinker locked into stone and iron 
For saying, 'The earth moves," 

And the pity of men learning by shocks, 

By pain and practice. 

By plunges and struggles in a bitter pool 

In the folded and quiet yesterdays 
how many times has it happened^ 

The leaders of the people estimated as to price 
And bought with bribes signed and delivered 
Or waylaid and shot or meshed by perjurers 
Or hunted and sent into hiding 
Or taken and paraded in garments of dung, 

Fire applied to their footsoles 
"Now will you talk?" 

Their mouths basted with rubber hose 
"Now will you talk?" 

Thrown into solitary, fed on slops, hung by thumbs. 

Till the mention of that uprising is casual, so-so. 

As though the next revolt breeds somewhere 
In the bowels of that mystic behemoth, the people 
"And when it comes again," say watchers, "we are ready " 
How many times 

in the folded and quiet yesterdays 
has it happened? 

"You may burn my flesh and bones 
and throw the ashes to the four winds," 
smiled one of them, 

"Yet my voice shall linger on 
and in the years yet to come 
the young shall ask what was the idea 
for which you gave me death 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


469 


and what was I saying 

that I must die for what I said?'^ 

28 

In the days of the cockade and the brass pistol 
Fear of the people brought the debtors' jail 
The creditor said, 'Tay me or go to pnson," 

And men lacking property lacked ballots and citizenship 
Into the Constitution of the United States they wrote a fear 
In the form of ^^checks and balances," '^proper restraints" 

On the people so whimsical and changeable. 

So variable in mood and weather 

Lights of tallow candles fell on lawbooks by night 

The woolspun clothes came from sheep near by 

Men of "'solid substance" wore velvet knickerbockers 

And shared snuff with one another in greetings 

One of these made a name for himself with saying 

You could never tell what was coming next from the people 

"Your people, sir, your people is a great beast," 

Speaking for those afraid of the people. 

Afraid of sudden massed action of the people, 

The people being irresponsible with torch, gun and rope. 

The people being a child with fire and loose hardware. 

The people listening to leather-lunged stump orators 
Crying the rich get richer, the poor poorer, and why^ 

The people undependable as prairie nvers in floodtime. 

The people uncertain as lights on the face of the sea 
Wherefore high and first of all he would write 
God, the Constitution, Property Rights, the Army and the Police, 
After these the rights of the people 

The meaning was 

The people having nothing to lose take chances 
The people having nothing to take care of are careless 
The people lacking property are slack about property 
Having no taxes to pay how can they consider taxes^ 

"And the poor have they nc^ themselves to blame for their poverty?" 


470 


  


Those who have must take care of those who have not 
Even though in the providence of events some of 
Those who now have not once had and what they had then 
Was taken away from them by those who now have 

Naughts are naughts into riffraff 
Nothing plus nothing equals nothing 
Scum IS scum and dregs are dregs 
'This flotsam and jetsam 

There is the House of Have and the House of Have-Not 
God named the Haves as caretakers of the Have-Nots 
This shepherding is a divine decree laid on the betters 
"And surely you know when you are among your betters^" 

This and a lot else was m the meaning 
"Your people, sir, is a great beast 
The testament came with deliberation 
Cold as ice, warm as blood. 

Hard as a steel hand steel-gloved, 

A steel foot steel-shod 

for contact with another testament 

"All men are born free and equal 

The cow content to give milk and calves, 

The plug work-horse plowing from dawn till dark. 

The mule lashed with a blacksnake when balking— 

Fed and sheltered— or maybe not— all depending— 

A pet monkey leaping for nuts thrown to it, 

A parrot ready to prattle your words 
And repeat after you your favorite oaths— 

Or a nameless monster to be guarded and tended 
Against temper and flashes of retaliation— 

These were the background symbols 

"Your people, sir, is a great beast 

29 

The people, yes— 

Bom with bones and heart fused in deep and violent secrets 
Mixed from a bowl of sky blue dreams and sea shme facts— 
A seething of saints and sinners, toilers, loafers, oxen, apes 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


47 ^ 


In a womb of superstition, faith, genius, crime, sacrifice— 
The one and only source of armies, navies, work gangs, 

The living flowing breath of the history of nations. 

Of the little Family of Man hugging the little ball of Earth, 
And a long hall of mirrors, straight, convex and concave. 
Moving and endless with scrolls of the living, 

Shimmering with phantoms flung from the past. 

Shot over with lights of babies to come, not yet here 

The honorable orators, the ga2d:tes of thunder, 

The tycoons, big shots and dictators. 

Flicker m the mirrors a few moments 
And fade through the glass of death 
For discussion m an autocracy of worms 
While the rootholds of the earth nourish the majestic people 
And the new generations with names never heard of 
Plow deep in broken drums and shoot craps for old crowns, 
Shouting ummagined shibboleths and slogans. 

Tracing their heels in moth-eaten insignia of bawdy leaders— 
Piling revolt on revolt across night valleys, 

Letting loose insurrections, uprisings, strikes, 

Marches, mass-meetings, banners, declared resolves, 

Plodding in a somnambulism of fog and ram 
Till a given moment exploded by long-prepared events— 
Then again the overthrow of an old order 
And the trials of another new authority 
And death and taxes, crops and droughts, 

Chinch bugs, grasshoppers, corn borers, boll weevils, 

Top soil farms blown away in a dust and wind. 
Inexorable rams carrying off rich loam. 

And mortgages, house rent, groceries. 

Jobs, pay cuts, layoffs, relief 
And passion and poverty and crime 
And the paradoxes not yet resolved 
Of the shrewd and elusive proverbs. 

The have-you-heard yarns. 

The hsten-to-this anecdote 

Made by the people out of the roots of the earth, 

Out of dirt, barns, workshops, timetables. 

Out of lumberjack payday jamborees. 


472 


  


Out of joybells and headaches the day after. 

Out of births, weddings, accidents. 

Out of wars, laws, promises, betrayals. 

Out of mists of the lost and anonymous. 

Out of plain living, early rising and spare belongings 


30 

We’ll see what we’ll see 
Time IS a great teacher 
Today me and tomonow maybe you 
This old anvil laughs at many broken hammers 

What is bitter to stand against today may be sweet to remember tomorrow 
Fine words butter no parsnips Moonlight dries no mittens 
Whether the stone bumps the jug or the jug bumps the stone it is bad 
for the jug 

One hand washes the other and both wash the face 
Better leave the child’s nose dirty than wring it off 
We all belong to the same big family and have the same smell 
Handling honey, tar or dung some of it sticks to the fingers 
The liar comes to believe his own lies 
He who bums himself must sit on the blisters 
God alone understands fools 
The dumb mother understands the dumb child 

To work hard, to live hard, to die hard, and then to go to hell after all 
would be too damned hard 

You can fool all the people part of the time and part of the people all the 
time but you can’t fool all of the people all of the time 
It takes all kinds of people to make a world 

What IS bred in the bone will tell 
Between the inbreds and the cross-breeds the argu- 
ment goes on 

You can breed them up as easy as you can breed 
them down 

“I don’t know who my ancestors were,” said a 
mongrel, “but we’ve been descending for a 
long time ” 

“My ancestors,” said the Cherokee-blooded Okla- 
homan, “didn’t come over in the May/Zower 
but we was there to meet the boat ” 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


473 


'Why/' said the Denver Irish policeman as he 
arrested a Pawnee Indian I W W soapboxer, 

"why don't you go back where you came from^” 

An expert is only a damned fool a long ways from home 

You're either a thoroughbred, a scrub, or an in-between 

Speed IS born with the foal— sometimes 

Always some dark horse never heard of before is coming under the wire 
a winner 

A thoroughbred always wins against a scrub, though you never know for 
sure even thoroughbreds have their off days new blood tells the 
wornout thoroughbreds lose to the fast young scrubs 

There is a luck of faces and bloods 
Comes to a child and touches it 
It comes like a bird never seen 
It goes like a bird never handled 
There are little mothers hear the bird, 

Feel the flitting of wings never seen. 

And the touch of the givers of luck, 

The hungers of faces and bloods 

3 1 

"Your low birth puts you beneath me," 
said Harmodius, Iphicrates replying, 

"The difference between us is this 

My family begins with me 
Yours ends with you " 

"A long, tall man won't always make a good fireman," said the Santa Fe 
engineer to a couple of other rails deadheading back "Out of a dozen 
wants to be firemen you can pick 'em Take one of these weakly 
fellers he'll do his best but he's all gone time you get nine miles 
Take a short, stout feller, low down so he can get at his coal, and he'll 
beat one of those tall fellers has to stoop But if a tall feller's got long 
arms he can do wonders I knowed one engineer used to say he had 
a fireman he never saw him throw a shovel of coal on the fire—his 
arms was so long he just reached and laid the coal on^" 

He can turn around on a dime 

He has an automobile thirst and a wheelbarrow income 


474 


  


I don't know where Fm going but Fm on my way 
Fll knock you so high m the air you'll starve coming down 
A bonanza is a hole in the ground owned by a champion liar 
All you get from him you can put in your eye 

He tried to get a bird m the hand and two in the bush but what he got 
was a horse of another color 

If the government tried to pay me for what I don't know there wouldn't 
be enough money in all the mints to pay me 
You can't tell him anything because he thinks he knows more now than 
he gets paid for 

It's a slow burg— I spent a couple of weeks there one day 
He bit off more than he could chew 
Don't take a mouthful bigger than your mouth 
Let's take it apart to see how it ticks 

If we had a little ham we could have some ham and eggs if we had some 
eggs 

He always takes off his hat when he mentions his own name 
What's the matter with him? The big I, always the big I 
''Why didn't you zigzag your car and miss him?" "He was zigzagging him- 
self and outguessed me " 

"Are you guilty or not guilty?" "'What else have you?" 

"Are you guilty or not guilty?" "I stands mute " 


32 

What the people learn out of lifting and hauling and waiting and losing 
and laughing 

Goes into a scroll, an almanac, a record folding and unfolding, and the 
music goes down and around 

The story goes on and on, happens, forgets to happen, goes out and meets 
itself coming m, puts on disguises and drops them 

“Yes yes, go on, go on. I’m listening ” You hear that in one doorway. 

And m the next, “Aw shut up, close your trap, button your tongue, you 
talk too much ” 

The people, yes, the people. 

To the museum, the aquanum, the planetanum, the zoo, they go by 
thousands, coming away to talk about mummies, camels, fish and 
stars, 

The police and constables holding every one of them either a lawbreaker 
or lawabiding 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


475 


The fingerprint expert swears no two of them ever has finger lines and 
circlings the same 

The handwriting expert swears no one of them ever writes his name twice 
the same way 

To the grocer and the banker they are customers, depositors, investors 
The politician counts them as voters, the newspaper editor as readers, the 
gambler as suckers 

The priest holds each one an immortal soul in the care of Almighty God 
bright accidents from the chromosome 
spill from the color bowl of the 
chromosomes some go under m early 
bubbles some learn from desert blos- 
soms how to lay up and use thin 
hoardings of night mist 

In an old French town 

the mayor ordered the people 

to hang lanterns m front of their houses 

which the people did 

but the lanterns gave no light 

so the mayor ordered they must 

put candles m the lanterns 

which the people did 

but the candles in the lanterns gave no light 

whereupon the mayor ordered 

they must light the candles m the lanterns 

which the people did 

and thereupon there was light 

The cauliflower is a cabbage with a college education 
All she needs for housekeeping is a can opener 
They'll fly high if you give them wings 
Put all your eggs m one basket and watch that basket 
Everybody talks about the weather and nobody does anything about it 
The auk flies backward so as to see where it's been 
Handle with care women and glass 
Women and linen look best by candlelight 
One hair of a woman draws more than a team of horses 
Blessed are they who expect nothing for they shall not be disappointed 
You can send a boy to college but you can't make him think 



476 


  


The time to sell is when you have a customer 
Sell the buffalo hide after you have killed the buffalo 
The more you fill a barrel the more it weighs unless you fill it with holes 
A pound of iron or a pound of feathers weighs the same 
Those in fear they may cast pearls before swine are often lacking in pearls 
May you live to eat the hen that scratches over your grave 
He seems to think he's the frog's tonsils but he looks to me like a plugged 
nickel 

If you don't like the coat bring back the vest and I'll give you a pair of 
pants 

The coat and the pants do the work but the vest gets the gravy 
'Tou are singing an invitation to summer," said the teacher, "'you are not 
defying it to come " 

''Sargeant, if a private calls you 
a dam fool, what of it^” 

'Td throw him in the guard house " 

''And if he just thinks you're a dam 
fool and don't say it, then what^" 

"Nothing " 

"Well, let it go at that " 

The white man drew a small circle m the sand 
and told the red man, "This is what the Indian 
knows," and drawing a big circle around the 
small one, "This is what the white man knows " 

The Indian took the stick and swept an immense 
ring around both circles "This is where the 
white man and the red man know nothing " 

On the long dirt road from Nagadoches to Austin 
The pioneer driving a yoke of oxen and a cart 
met a heavy man in a buggy driving a team 
of glossy black horses 

"I am Sam Houston, Governor of the State of Texas, 
and I order you to turn out of the road for me " 

"I am an Amencan citizen and a taxpayer of Texas 
and I have as much right to the road as you " 

"That IS an intelligent answer and I salute you 
and I will turn out of the road for you " 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


477 


What did they mean with that Iowa epitaph 
''She averaged well for this vicinity’^'? 

And why should the old Des Moines editor 
say they could write on his gravestone. 

"He et what was sot before him''? 

"I never boiirowed your umbrella/' said a 

borrower, "and if I did I brought it back " 

He was quiet as a wooden-legged man on a tin 
roof and busy as a one-armed paper-hanger 
with the hives 

When a couple of fried eggs were offered the 
new hired man he said, "I don't dirty my 
plate for less than six " 

Why did the top sergeant tell the rookie, "Put 
on your hat, here comes a woodpecker"? 
"Whiskey," taunted the Irish orator, "whiskey 
it is that makes you shoot at the landlords 
—and miss 'em^" 

"Unless you learn," said the father to the son, 

"how to tell a horse chestnut from a chest- 
nut horse you may have to live on soup made 
from the shadow of a starved pigeon " 

Said Oscar neither laughing nor crying "We fed 
the rats to the cats and the cats to the rats 
and was just getting into the big money when 
the whole thing went blooey on account of the 
overproduction of rats and cats " 

Where you been so long? 

What good wind blew you in? 

Snow again, kid, I didn't get your drift 
Everything now is either swell or lousy 
"It won't be long now," was answered, 

"The worst is yet to come " 

Of the dead merchant pnnce whose holdings 
were colossal the ditch-digger queried, 

"How much did he leave? All of it " 


  


478 

''What do you want to 
T R asked 

Bruere answered, "Just an 
earthworm turning over a 
little of the soil near me '' 

"Great men never feel great/" 

say the Chinese 

"Small men never feel small "" 

33 

Remember the chameleon He was a well-behaved chameleon and noth 
mg could be brought against his record As a chameleon he had done 
the things that should have been done and left undone the things 
that should have been left undone He was a first-class unimpeach- 
able chameleon and nobody had anything on him But he came to a 
Scotch plaid and tried to cross it In order to cross he had to imitate 
six different yarn colors, first one and then another and back to the first 
or second He was a brave chameleon and died at the crossroads true 
to his chameleon instincts 

What kind of a liar are you^ 

People he because they don"t remember clear what they saw 

People he because they can"t help making a story better than it was the 
way it happened 

People tell "white lies"" so as to be decent to others 

People he in a pinch, hating to do it, but lying on because it might be 
worse 

And people he just to be liars for a crooked personal gam 
What sort of a liar are you? 

Which of these liars are you? 


34 

If you can imagine love letters wntten back and forth between Mary 
Magdalene and Judas Iscanot, if you can see Napoleon dying and 
saying he was only a sawdust emperor and an imitation of the real 
thing, if you can see judges step down from the bench and take death 
sentences from murderers sitting in black robes, if you can see big 
thieves protected by law acknowledging to petty thieves handcuffed 
and convicted that they are both enemies of society, if you can vision 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


479 


an opposite for every reality, then you can shake hands with yourself 
and murmur, “Pardon my glove, what were we saying when inter- 
rupted?” 

35 

The sea moves always, the wind moves always 

They want and want and there is no end to their wanting. 

What they sing is the song of the people 

Man will never arrive, man will be always on the way 

It IS written he shall rest but never for long 

The sea and the wind tell him he shall be lonely, meet love, be shaken 
with struggle, and go on wanting 

'When I was born in the Chicago Lying-in Hospital,^' said the pioneer's 
grandson, "there was a surgeon with multiple instruments, two 
nurses m starched uniforms with silk, gauze, antiseptics, and the 
obliterating cone of the grateful anesthesia When my grandfather 
was born m the naked cornlands of Nebraska there was only a granny 
woman with a few clean rags and a pail of warm water 

You can go now yes go now Go east or west, go north or south, you can 
go now Or you can go up or go down now And after these there 
is no place to go If you say no to all of them then you stay here 
You don't go You are fixed and put And from here if you choose 
you send up rockets, you let down buckets Here then for you is the 
center of things 

36 

“I AM zero, naught, one cipher,” 
meditated the symbol preceding the numbers. 

“Think of nothing I am the sign of it 
I am bitter weather, zero 
In heavy fog the sky ceiling is zero 
Think of nowhere to go I am it 
Those doomed to nothing for today 
and the same nothing for tomorrow, 
those without hits, runs, errors, 

I am their sign and epitaph, 

the goose egg 0 

even the least of these— that is me ” 


480 


  


When they told those who had no money 
“Save your money” 

Those who had no money flashed back 
“Would you ask those with notlnng to eat 
to eat less?” 

'The stairway of time ever echoes 
with the wooden shoe going up 
the polished boot coming down ” 

Ghost and nch man 
“What do you see out of the window?” 

“The people” 

“And what do you see in the mirror?” 

“Myself” 

“Yet the glass in the mirror is the 
same only it is silvered ” 

“If I am a queen and you are a queen, 
who fetches the water?” inquire the 
Hindus, the Turks asking “If you are 
a gentleman and I am a gentleman, who 
will milk the cow?” and the Irish 
“If you’re a lady and I’m a lady, 
who’ll put the sow out of the house?” 

“The man put green spectacles on his cow and fed her sawdust 
Maybe she would believe it was grass 
But she didn’t She died on him ” 

When the horses gagged at going farther up the steep hill, the dnver 
shouted 

“First class passengers, keep your seats 
Second class passengers, get out and walk 
Third class passengers, get out and shove ” 

Said the scorpion of hate “The poor hate the nch The nch hate the 
poor The south hates the north The west hates the east. The 
workers hate their bosses The bosses hate their workers The coun- 
try hates the towns The towns hate the country We are a house 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


481 


divided against itself We are millions of hands raised against each 
other We are united in but one aim— getting the dollar And when 
we get the dollar we employ it to get more dollars 


37 

''So you want to divide all the money there is 
and give every man his share?'' 

"That's it Put it all m one big pile and split 
it even for everybody " 

"And the land, the gold, silver, oil, copper, you want 
that divided up?" 

"Sure— an even whack for all of us " 

"Do you mean that to go for horses and cows?" 
"Sure— why not?" 

"And how about pigs?" 

"Oh to hell with you— you know I got a couple of 


In the night and the mist these voices 
What IS mine is mine and I am going to keep it 
What IS yours is yours and you are welcome to keep it 
You will have to fight me to take from me what is mine 
Part of what is mine is yours and you are welcome to it 
What is yours is mine and I am going to take it from you 
In the night and the mist 
the voices meet 
as the clash of steel on steel 
Over the rights of possession and control and the points 
what is mine? what is yours? 
and who says so? 

The poor were divided into 

the deserving and the undeserving 

and a pioneer San Franciscan lacked words 

"It's hard enough to be poor 

but to be poor and undeserving 

He saw the slumborn illbom wearyborn 

from fathers and mothers the same 

out of rooms dank with rot 


482 


  


and scabs, rags, festerings, tubercles, chancres, 
the very doorways quavering, 

"Whafs the use?^' 

''I came to a country,*' 
said a wind-bitten vagabond, 

''where I saw shoemakers barefoot 
saying they had made too many shoes 
I met carpenters living outdoors 
saying they had built too many houses 
Clothing workers I talked with, 
bushelmen and armhole-basters, 
said their coats were on a ragged edge 
because they had made too many coats 
And I talked with farmers, yeomanry, 
the backbone of the country, 
so they were told, 

saying they were m debt and near starvation 

because they had gone ahead like always 

and raised too much wheat and corn 

too many hogs, sheep, cattle 

When I said, 'You live m a strange country,' 

they answered slow, like men 

who wouldn't waste anything, not even language 

'You ain’t far wrong there, young feller 

We're going to do something, we don't know what ' " 

The drowning man in the nver 
answered the man on the bridge 
"I don't want to die. 

I'll lose my job in the molding room of 
the Malleable Iron and Castings Works " 

And the living man on the bridge 

hotfooted to the molding room foreman 

of the Malleable Iron and Castings Works 

and got a short answer 

"You're ten minutes late The man who 

pushed that fellow off the bridge 

IS already on the job " 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


483 


''What do you want?'' a passing stranger asked 
a County Kerry farmer 

"What IS it I'm wantin'? Me byes and girruls 
IS gone The ram has rotted the prathies 
The landlord has taken me pig for the nnt 
All Fm wantin' is the Judgment Day " 

"The poor of the earth hide themselves together," wrote Job meaning in 
those days too they had a shantytown 
"As wild asses in the wilderness they must go forth, to seek food as their 
task," wrote Job meaning then too they carried the banner and 
hoped to connect with board and clothes somehow 
"In a field not theirs they harvest," wrote Job as though m Judea then 
the frontier was gone, as now in America instead of free homesteads 
the signs say No Trespassing 

"The weaklings groan and the souls of the wounded cry for help," wrote 
Job taking special notice of those "forced to garner the vineyard of 
the wicked one," mentioning footless wanderers of Bible times as 
though the devices of men then too had an edge against the prop- 
ertyless 

In the Sunflower State 1928 Anno Domini 

a Jayhawker sunburnt and gaunt 

drove to a loading platform 

and took what he got for his hogs 

and spoke before two other hog raisers* 

''Everything's lopsided 

"I raise hogs and the railroads and the banks take them away from me 
and I get hit in the hind end 
"The more hogs I raise the worse my mortgages look 
"I try to sleep and I hear those mortgages gnawing in the night like rats 
in a corn crib 

"I want to shoot somebody but I don't know who 
"We'll do something You wait and see 

"We don't have to stand for this skin game if we're free Americans " 

"Get oflE this estate" 

"What for?" 

"Because it's mine" 

"Where did you get it?" 


484 


  


“From my father” 

“Where did he get it?” 

“From his father ” 

“And where did he get it?” 

“He fought for rt” 

“Well, ril fight you for it” 

38 

Have you seen men handed refusals 
till they began to laugh 
at the notion of ever landing a job again— 
Muttering with the laugh, 

''If s driving me nuts and the family too,'' 
Mumbling of hoodoos and jinx, 

fear of defeat creeping in their vitals— 

Have you ne\er seen this^ 
or do you kid yourself 
with the fond soothing syrup of four words 
"Some folks won't work"?^ 

Of course some folks won't work— 
they are sick or wornout or lazy 
or misled with the big idea 
the idle poor should imitate the idle rich 

Have you seen women and kids 

step out and hustle for the family 

some m night life on the streets 

some fighting other women and kids 

for the leavings of fruit and vegetable markets 

or searching alleys and garbage dumps for scraps^ 

Have you seen them with savings gone 
furniture and keepsakes pawned 
and the pawntickets blown away in cold winds^ 
by one letdown and another ending 
m what you might call slums— 

To be named perhaps in case reports 
and tabulated and classified 
among those who have crossed over 
from the employables into the unemployables^ 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


4S5 


What IS the saga of the employables^ 
what are the breaks they get^ 

What are the dramas of personal fate 

spilled over from industrial transitions^ 
what punishments handed bottom people 
who have wronged no man's house 
or things or person? 

Stocks are property, yes 
Bonds are property, yes 
Machines, land, buildings, are property, yes. 

A job is property, 
no, nix, nah nah 

The rights of property are guarded 

by ten thousand laws and fortresses 
The right of a man to live by his work— 
what IS this right? 
and why does it clamor? 
and who can hush it 
so it vull stay hushed? 
and why does it speak 
and though put down speak again 
with strengths out of the earth? 

39 

There have been thousands of Andy Adams 
only Andy was one of the few who had the words 
''Our men were plainsmen and were at home 
as long as they could see the North Star '' 

They got his drift when he laughed 
"Blankets? Never use them Sleep on your belly and 
cover it with your back and get up with the 
birds m the morning 

"Saddles? Every good cowman takes his saddle 
wherever he goes though he may not have 
clothes enough to dust a fiddle " 

They could ride long hours m ram and sleet dozing 
and taking short sleeps in their saddles, resting 
to linger over their morning coffee 



486 


  


This breed of men gone to a last roundup? 

They will be heard from 

They tell us now any Texas girl is worth marrying 
'"No matter what happens, she has seen worse '' 

In oak and walnut 

Those old New England carpenters hoisted and 
wrought 

Sunup till sundown they hoisted and wrought m 
oak and walnut 

Wood had a meaning and wood spoke to the feel of 
the fingers 

The hammer handles and the handwrought nails 
somehow had blessings 

And they are gone now? their blood is no longer 
alive and speaking? 

They no longer come through telling of the hands 
of man having craft? 

Let their beds and staircases, chairs and gables now 
lingering testify: 

The strong workman whose blood goes into his 
work no more dies than the people die 

*Tm holding my own,” 
said more than one pioneer. 

didn't have anything 
when I landed here 
and I ain't got anything now 
but I got some hope left 
I ain't lost hope yet 
I'm a wanter and a hoper'^ 

40 

“We live only once ” 

Of course the people buy great big hump-backed 
double-]Ointed fresh-roasted peanuts at ten 
a sack folks ten a sack— 

Of course the people go to see the greatest 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


487 


aggregation of concatenated curiosities and 
monstrosities ever assembled beneath one 
canvas— 

Of course they enjoy the oily slant-eyed spieler 
with his slick bazoo selling tickets and gab- 
bing One at a time please One at a time, 
and inside the tent Tom Thumb and Jumbo, 
the hippodrome charioteers, the clowns and 
tumblers, the lighted pink moment when a 
lithe woman is flung into empty air from 
one flying trapeze to another 
''We live only once 

Of course the greatest showman on earth who 
excused himself with saying, "The people 
love to be humbugged,'" was himself hum- 
bugged and lost the first of his fortunes to 
the fate that humbugged him out of it. 

Do this, buy now, go here, 
stand up, come down, watch 
me and you will see I have 
nothing up my sleeve and I 
merely execute a twist of 
the wrist and a slight mo- 
tion of the hand Do this, 
buy now, go here, plans, 
programs, inventions, promises, 
games, commands, suggestions, 
hints, insinuations, pour 
from professional schemers 
into the ears of the people 

41 

"Why did the children 
put beans in their ears 
when the one thing we told the children 
they must not do 
was put beans in their ears^” 


488 


  


"Why did the children 

pour molasses on the cat 

when the one thing we told the children 

they must not do 

was pour molasses on the cat?"' 


42 

Why repeat? I heard you the first time 
You can lead a horse to water, if you Ve 
got the horse 

The rooster and the horse agreed not to 
step on each other's feet 
The caterpillar is a worm in a raccoon 
coat going for a college education 
The cockroach is always wrong when it 
argues with the chicken 
If I hadn't done it Monday somebody 
else would have done it Tuesday 
Money is like manure— good only when 
spread around 

You're such a first-class liar I'll take a 
chance with you 
A short horse is soon curried 
A still pig drinks the swill 
Small potatoes and few in a hill 
A fat man on a bony horse “I feed my- 
self— others feed the horse " 

No peace on earth with the women, no 
life anywhere without them 
Some men dress quick, others take as 
much time as a woman 
""You're a liar " ""Surely not if you say 
so 

He tried to walk on both sides of the 
street at once 

He tried to tear the middle of the street 
in two 

""When is a man intoxicated?" ""When he 
tries to kiss the bartender good night " 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


489 


“He says he’ll kick me the next time we 
meet What’ll I do?” “Sit down ” 

He’s as handy as that bird they call the 
elephant 

Now that's settled and out of the way 
what are you going to do next^ 

^Trom here on/' said the driver at an 
imaginary line ndkx the foothills of 
the Ozarks, ''the hills don't get any 
higher but the hollers get deeper 
and deeper" 

So slick he was his feet slipped out from 
under him 

The ground flew up and hit him in the 
face 

Trade it for a dog, drown the dog, and 
you'll be rid of both of them 

There'll be many a dry eye at his funeral. 

"Which way to the post offlce, boy^" 

"I don't know " "You don't know 
much, do you^" "No, but I ain't 
lost" 


43 

When we say fresh eggs we mean fresh 

Buying or selling strictly fresh eggs we mean 
strictly 

If eggs are guaranteed extra special what more 
could be asked^ 

A rotten egg can't be spoiled and a shrewd 
buyer knows an asking price from a sell- 
ing price 

Why do they say of some fellows, "He knows 
all about the Constitution and the price 
of eggs"? 

Eggs offered as plain and ordinary means as 
eggs they are not bad 

The egg market punster noted of one buyer, 
"He dozen't eggsspect eggs speckled" 


490 


  


Eggs spotted or dirty of course are priced 
accordingly 

Broken eggs can never be mended they go 
in a barrel by themselves 
What sort of an egg are you 
Just today or yesterday someone was saying 
you are a good egg or a bad egg or not- 
so-bad or hard to classify 
Under a microscope Agassiz studied one egg 
chaos, flux, constellations, rainbows 
''It IS a universe in miniature '' 


4 4 

Why should any man try to find the distance to the moon by guessing 
half way and then multiplying by two^ 

To never see a fool you lock yourself in your room and smash the looking- 
glass 

The new two dollar a day street-sprinkler driver took his job so serious he 
went right on driving while the ram poured down 

‘'What’ you saw a man drowning and didn't help him?" "Well, he didn't 
ask me to " 

"Help’ help’ I'm drowning" "Tuesday is the day I help the drowning 
and I'll be here Tuesday " 

"The peacock has a beautiful tail," said the other birds "But look at 
those legs’ and what a voice’" 

The farther up the street you go the tougher they get and I live in the 
last house 

There's only two in the country and I'm both of 'em 

I can live without you in the daytime but oh when that evening sun goes 
down it's nighttime that's killing me 

When the hotel waitress saw the traveling man eat fourteen ears of corn- 
on-the-cob one summer noon in the horse-and-buggy days, she asked, 
"Don't you think it would be cheaper for you to board at a livery- 
stable?" 

The fresh young hotel clerk pulled a fast one on the internationally famous 
scientist who asked if they had an Encyclopaedia Britanmca in the 
house "No, we haven't, but what is it you'd like to know?" 

The degree B B D P B B B means Big Bass Drum Player Boston Brass 
Band 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


491 


The letter of recommendation read, “This man worked for me one week 
and I am satisfied '' 

If he had a little more sense he'd be a half-wit 
He opened his mouth and put his foot in it 
“Do you think it will ram?" “Be a long dry spell if it don't " 

“Got enough, sonny?" “No, but I've got down to where it don't taste 
good any more " 

Yesterday's hits win no runs today 
Nothing is so dead as yesterday's newspaper 
Do right by any man and don't write any woman 
The best throw of the dice is to throw 'em away 
“Give me something to eat," grinned a hobo “I'm so thirsty I don't 
know where I'm going to sleep tonight " 

“When he whittles toward him he's in good humor, but let him alone 
when he cuts the other way," they said of a Union Stockyards 
pioneer 

“And now," said the justice of the peace, “by the authority of the State 
of Wisconsin in me vested I do hereby pronounce you man and 
woman " 

“Don't analyze me— please," the stenographer pleaded “Sometimes 
when I think about you I'm afraid my heart will strip a gear" 


45 

They have yarns 

Of a skyscraper so tall they had to put hinges 
On the two top stories so to let the moon go by, 

Of one com crop in Missouri when the roots 
Went so deep and drew off so much water 
The Mississippi riverbed that year was dry. 

Of pancakes so thin they had only one side. 

Of “a fog so thick we shingled the bam and six feet out on the fog," 

Of Pecos Pete straddling a cyclone in Texas and riding it to the west 
coast where “it rained out under him," 

Of the man who drove a swarm of bees across the Rocky Mountains and 
the Desert ''and didn't lose a bee," 

Of a mountain railroad curve where the engineer m his cab can touch 
the caboose and spit in the conductor's eye. 

Of the boy who climbed a cornstalk growing so fast he would have 
starved to death if they hadn't shot biscuits up to him, 



492 


  


Of the old man's whiskers ''When the wind was with him his whiskers 
arrived a day before he did/' 

Of the hen laying a square egg and cackling, "Ouch^" and of hens laying 
eggs with the dates printed on them, 

Of the ship captain's shadow it froze to the deck one cold winter night. 
Of mutineers on that same ship put to chipping rust with rubber 
hammers, 

Of the sheep counter who was fast and accurate "I just count their feet 
and divide by four," 

Of the man so tall he must climb a ladder to shave himself, 

Of the runt so teeny-weeny it takes two men and a boy to see him, 

Of mosquitoes one can kill a dog, two of them a man, 

Of a cyclone that sucked cookstoves out of the kitchen, up the chimney 
flue, and on to the next town. 

Of the same cyclone picking up wagon-tracks m Nebraska and dropping 
them over in the Dakotas, 

Of the hook-and-eye snake unlocking itself into forty pieces, each piece 
two inches long, then in nine seconds flat snapping itself together 
again, 

Of the watch swallowed by the cow—when they butchered her a year 
later the watch was running and had the correct time. 

Of horned snakes, hoop snakes that roll themselves where they want to 
go, and rattlesnakes carrying bells instead of rattles on their tails. 
Of the herd of cattle in California getting lost in a giant redwood tree 
that had hollowed out. 

Of the man who killed a snake by putting its tail m its mouth so it 
swallowed itself, 

Of railroad trains whizzing along so fast they reach the station before 
the whistle, 

Of pigs so thin the farmer had to tie knots in their tails to keep them 
from crawling through the cracks in their pens. 

Of Paul Bunyan's big blue ox, Babe, measuring between the eyes forty- 
two ax-handles and a plug of Star tobacco exactly, 

Of John Henry's hammer and the curve of its swing and his singing of 
it as "a rainbow round my shoulder " 

^'Do telh" 

'1 want to know^'^ 

^Tou don't say so^"^ 

''For the land's sakel'^ 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


493 


''Gosh all fish-hooks»” 

"Tell me some more 

I don't believe a word you say 

but I love to listen 

to your sweet harmonica 

to your chm-music 

Your fish stories hang together 

when they're ]ust a pack of lies 

you ought to have a leather medal 

you ought to have a statue 

carved of butter you deserve 

a large bouquet of turnips '' 

"Yessir," the traveler drawled, 

"Away out there in the petrified forest 

everything goes on the same as usual 

The petrified birds sit in their petrified nests 

and hatch their petrified young from petrified eggs " 

A high pressure salesman jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge and was saved 
by a policeman But it didn't take him long to sell the idea to the 
policeman So together they jumped off the bridge 

One of the oil men in heaven started a rumor of a gusher down in hell 
All the other oil men left in a hurry for hell As he gets to thinking 
about the rumor he had started he says to himself there might be 
something m it after all So he leaves for hell in a hurry 

"The number 42 will win this raffle, that's my number " And when he 
won they asked him whether he guessed the number or had a 
system He said he had a system, "I took up the old family album 
and there on page 7 was my grandfather and grandmother both on 
page 7 I said to myself this is easy for 7 times 7 is the number that 
will win and 7 times 7 is 42 " 

Once a shipwrecked sailor caught hold of a stateroom door and floated 
for hours till friendly hands from out of the darkness threw him a 
rope And he called across the night, 'What country is this^'’ and 
hearing voices answer, "New Jersey," he took a fresh hold on the 
floating stateroom door and called back half-wearily, ‘T guess I’ll float 
a little farther" 


494 


  


An Ohio man bundled up the tin roof of a summer kitchen and sent it 
to a motorcar maker with a complaint of his car not giving service 
In three weeks a new car amved for him and a letter “We regret 
delay m shipment but your car was received in a very bad order ” 
A Dakota cousin of this Ohio man sent six years of tin can accumula- 
tions to the same works, asking them to overhaul his car Two weeks 
later came a rebuilt car, five old tin cans, and a letter “We are also 
forwarding you five parts not necessary in our new model ” 

Thus fantasies heard at filling stations m the midwest Another relates 
to a Missoun mule who took aim with his heels at an automobile 
rattling by The car turned a somersault, lit next a fence, ran right 
along through a cornfield till it came to a gate, moved onto the road 
and went on its way as though nothing had happened The mule 
heehawed with desolation, “What’s the use?” 

Another tells of a farmer and his family stalled on a railroad crossing, 
how they jumped out in time to see a limited express knock it into 
flinders, the farmer calling, “Well, I always did say that car was no 
shucks in a real pinch ” 

When the Masonic Temple in Chicago was the tallest building in the 
United States west of New York, two men who would cheat the 
eyes out of you if you gave ’em a chance, took an Iowa farmer to the 
top of the building and asked him, “How is this for high?” They 
told him that for $25 they would go down in the basement and turn 
the building around on its turn-table for him while he stood on the 
roof and saw how this seventh wonder of the world worked He 
handed them $25 They went He waited They never came back 
This IS told in Chicago as a folk tale, the same as the legend of Mrs 
O’Leary’s cow kicking over the bam lamp that started the Chicago 
fire, when the Georgia visitor, Robert Toombs, telegraphed an 
Atlanta crony, “Chicago is on fire, the whole city burning down, 
God be praisedi” 

Nor IS the prize sleeper Rip Van Winkle and his scolding wife forgotten, 
nor the headless horseman scooting through Sleepy Hollow 
Nor the sunken treasure-ships in coves and harbors, the hideouts of gold 
and silver sought by Coronado, nor the Flying Dutchman rounding 
the Cape doomed to nevermore pound his ear nor ever again take 
a snooze for himself 

Nor the sailor’s caretaker Mother Carey seeing to it that every seafaring 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


495 


man in the afterworld has a seabird to bring him news of ships and 
women, an albatross for the admiral, a gull for the deckhand 
Nor the sailor with a sweetheart in every port of the world, nor the ships 
that set out with flying colors and all the promises you could ask, 
the ships never heard of again. 

Nor Jim Liverpool, the riverman who could ]ump across any river and 
back without touching land he was that quick on his feet, 

Nor Mike Fink along the Ohio and the Mississippi, half wild horse and 
half cock-eyed alligator, the rest of him snags and snapping turtle 
''I can out-run, out-jump, out-shoot, out-brag, out-drink, and out-fight, 
rough and tumble, no holts barred, any man on both sides of the river 
from Pittsburgh to New Orleans and back again to St Louis My 
trigger finger itches and I want to go redhot War, famine and blood- 
shed puts flesh on my bones, and hardship's my daily bread " 

Nor the man so lean he threw no shadow six rattlesnakes struck at him 
at one time and every one missed him 

4 6 

The gang m its working clothes 
the picnic bunch in its best bib and tucker 
hicks from the sticks and big town hicks 
they sing whatever they want to 
and it may be The Old Rugged Cross 
or The Old Gray Mare or a late hit 
They are hit by the hit songs 
IPs a hit only when it hits them 
They soon drop it like a hot potato 
or they hold on to it for keeps 
And whenever they keep changing a song 
with tunes twisted forty ways 
and new verses you never heard of— 
at last then it's a folk song 

''Everybody is cleverer than anybody," 
said a smooth old fox 
who once ran France with his left hand 

Of the woman born deaf, blind and dumb, the vaudeville audience 
asked questions 


496 


  


“Have you ever thought of getting married? Why has 

a cow two stomachs? How much is too many? Do you 

believe in ghosts? Do you think it is a blessing to 

be poor? Do you dream? Do you think business is looking up? Am I 

going on a trip?” 

And the woman enjoyed answering these questions from people bom 
with sight and hearing 

“I liked it I liked to feel the warm tide of human 
life pulsing round and round me ” 

Her face lighted when a burst of handclapping and light laughter swept 
the audience 

“How do you know when we applaud you?” they asked 
And she answered the vibrations m the boards of the 
stage floor under her feet told her of every shading 
of applause 

In the farm house passing another crock of apples. 

On the streetcar riding to the roller coasters. 

At picnics, clambakes, or the factory workbench 
They have nddles, good and bad conundrums 

Which goes through the plank first, the bullet or the hole? 

Where does the music go when the fiddle is put in the box? 
Where does your lap go when you stand up? The same place your 
fist goes when you open your hand 
What are the two smallest things mentioned in the Bible? The 
widow’s mite and the wicked flee 

Who are the shortest people mentioned m the Bible? Bildad the 
Shuhite, Knee-high-miah, and the man who had nothing but 
from whom even that which he had was taken away 
What was the last thing Paul Revere said to his horse on the famous 
nde? “Whoa'” 

“Did you hear about the empty barrel of flour?” “No” “Nothing 
m It ” 

What IS there more of in the world than anything else? Ends 

They have Irish bulls timeworn and mossgrown 
You are to be hanged and I hope it will prove a warning to you 
I took so much medicine I was sick a long time after I got well 
I can never get these boots on bll I have worn them for a while 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


497 


One of us naust kill the other— let it be me We were boys together— at 
least I was 

If all the world were blind what a melancholy sight it would be 

This will last forever and afterward be sold for old iron 

They would cut us into mmce-meat and throw our bleeding heads on the 
table to stare us in the face 

On the dim and faroff shore of the future we can see the footprint of an 
unseen hand 

We pursue the shadow, the bubble bursts, and leaves in our hands only 
ashes 


''Ah there tootsie wootsie/' has its day 
till the good old summertime has gone 
with the kit and caboodle of its day 
into the second-hand bins, the rummage sales, 
and another whim emerges in, "Okay toots*'" 

The people, yes, the customers. 

In short-order lunch rooms they read signs 
If the ice-box gets on fire ring the towel 
Don't tip the waiters— it upsets them 
Eat here— why go somewhere else to be cheated^ 

Your face is good but it won't go in the cash register 
"There ain't no strong coffee, there's only weak people," said one heavy 
on the ]ava 


The people is a child at school writing howlers, 
writing answers half wrong and half right 

The government of England is a limited mockery 
Gravitation is that which if there were none we would all fly away 
There were no Christians among the early Gauls, they were mostly 
lawyers 


47 

Who made Paul Bunyan, who gave him birth as a myth, who joked him 
into life as the Master Lumberjack, who fashioned him forth as an 
apparition easing the hours of men amid axes and trees, saws and 
lumber? The people, the bookless people, they made Paul and had 
him alive long before he got into the books for those who read He 
grew up in shanties, around the hot stoves of wmter, among socks 



49S 


  


and mittens drying, in the smell of tobacco smoke and the roar of 
laughter mocking the outside weather And some of Paul came over- 
seas in wooden bunks below decks in sailing vessels And some of Paul 
IS old as the hills, young as the alphabet. 

The Pacific Ocean froze over m the winter of the Blue Snow and Paul 
Bunyan had long teams of oxen hauling regular white snow over 
from China This was the winter Paul gave a party to the Seven 
Axmen Paul fixed a granite floor sunk two hundred feet deep for 
them to dance on Still, it tipped and tilted as the dance went on 
And because the Seven Axmen refused to take off their hob-nailed 
boots, the sparks from the nails of their dancing feet lit up the place 
so that Paul didn’t light the kerosene lamps No women being on the 
Big Onion river at that time the Seven Axmen had to dance with 
each other, the one left over in each set taking Paul as a partner 
The commotion of the dancing that night brought on an earthquake 
and the Big Onion river moved over three counties to the east 

One year when it rained from St Patnck’s Day till the Fourth of July, 
Paul Bunyan got disgusted because his celebration on the Fourth was 
spoiled He dived into Lake Supenor and swam to where a solid 
pillar of water was coming down He dived under this pillar, swam 
up into it and climbed with powerful swimming strokes, was gone 
about an hour, came splashmg down, and as the ram stopped, he 
explained, “I turned the dam thing off ” This is told in the Big North 
Woods and on the Great Lakes, with many particulars 

Two mosquitoes lighted on one of Paul Bunyan’s oxen, killed it, ate it, 
cleaned the bones, and sat on a grub shanty picking their teeth as 
Paul came along Paul sent to Australia for two special bumblebees 
to kill these mosquitoes But the bees and the mosquitoes mter- 
mamed, their children had stingers on both ends And things kept 
getting worse till Paul brought a big boatload of sorghum up from 
Louisiana and while all the bee-mosqmtoes were eating at the sweet 
sorghum he floated them down to the Gulf of Mexico They got so 
fat that It was easy to drown them all between New Orleans and 
Galveston 

Paul logged on the Little Gimlet in Oregon one winter The cook stove 
at that camp covered an acre of ground They fastened the side of 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


499 


a hog on each snowshoe and four men used to skate on the griddle 
while the cook flipped the pancakes The eating table was three miles 
long, elevators carried the cakes to the ends of the table where boys 
on bicycles rode back and forth on a path down the center of the 
table dropping the cakes where called for 

Benny, the Little Blue Ox of Paul Bunyan, grew two feet every time Paul 
looked at him, when a youngster The bam was gone one morning 
and they found it on Benny's back, he grew out of it in a night One 
night he kept pawing and bellowing for more pancakes, till there were 
two hundred men at the cook shanty stove trying to keep him fed 
About breakfast time Benny broke loose, tore down the cook shanty, 
ate all the pancakes piled up for the loggers' breakfast And after that 
Benny made his mistake, he ate the red hot stove, and that finished 
him This IS only one of the hot stove stories told in the North Woods 

48 

One of the Cherokees in Oklahoma, having a million or so from oil 
rights, went to a motorcar dealer, looked over the different new 
makes, and in a corner of the salesroom noticed a brand-new white 
hearse, embellished, shining, emblazoned ^'This one for me," he 
said, and he rode away, his chauffeur driving and himself seated in- 
side the glittering white funeral car They tell this in Oklahoma as 
a folk tale It is 

In Honolulu they have cockroach races and bet on the winner 

In Japan they have grasshopper stables, each grasshopper in a little stall 
by himself 

In Mexico they sit around a table each man having a cube of sugar and 
the first to have a fly sit on his sugar wins the money 

Didn't he belong to the people, that Gallic eater 
and drinker whose will was short and read 'T have 
nothing, I owe much, I leave the remainder to the 
poor"? 

And why shouldn't they say of one windbag in 
Washington, D C , ''An empty taxicab drew up to 
the curb and Senator So-and-So stepped out"? 




500 


  


'The hungry hog follows his nose to the warm 
swill/' said an old farmer 
"He could live on the smell of an oil rag/' they 
said of an old sailor on a tramp steamer 
"When the wind favors you can smell a slave-ship 
seven miles," they said in days now gone 

"Baby, baby, you will get new shoes at the gate of 
heaven," sing the Mexican mothers to the mu- 
chacho 

"How are crops this year?" 

"Not so good for a good year 
but not so bad for a bad year " 

"Didn't you hear me holler for help?" 

"Yes but you're such a liar 
I didn't think you meant it " 

What about that railroad engineer 

running on the Pennsy 

twenty-two years out of Chicago 

leaving his mother $12,000 

directing m his will 

they should burn his body 

as a piece of rolling-stock 

beyond rehabilitation or repair 

and take the ashes to his pet locomotive 

and when they had mn her 

to the Beverly curve at 87th Street 

where the open prairie view was special 

and his eyes had so often 

met a changing sky of red and gold-— 

there from the old cab of locomotive No 8152 

they could empty his firebox 

they could throw his ashes 

strew the last cinders and clinkers 

of an engineer, an old hogger 

thankful he had lived— 

Always when he had rounded that curve 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


501 


his run was over and he could go home— 

What did he have? 

They obliged him Why shouldn't they? 

They were glad to ''But he was peculiar, wasn't he?" 

''Haven't you had a little too much?" the White House guard asked the 
Sioux warrior who shifted a blanket "A little too much is ]ust 
enough " 

When Chicago has a debate whether there is a hell someone always says, 
"Down in hell they debate whether there is a Chicago " 

"Too bad you have to work in this kind of a soup parlor," the customer 
sympathized, the waiter refusing the sympathy "I work here but I 
don't eat here " 

A short-order lunch room in Waterloo hangs up a sign for visiting 
Hawkeyes "We eat our own hash— think it over " 

A college boarding house in Ann Arbor instructs the scissorbill "God 
hates a glutton— learn to say No " 

The slim little wiry Texas Ranger answering a not call heard from the 
town committee that they certainly expected at least a company of 
troopers, which brought his query, "There's only one not— isn't 
there?" 

"Are you happy?" the evangelist asked the new half-convert "Well, 
parson. I'm not damn happy, just happy, that's all" 


49 

He was a king or a shah, an ahkoond or rajah, 

the head man of the country, 

and he commanded the learned men of the books 

they must put all their books ih one, 

which they did, 

and this one book into a single page, 
which they did 

"Suppose next," said the head man, who was 
either a king or shah, an ahkoond or rajah, 
"Suppose now you give my people 
the history of the world and its peoples 
m three words— come, go to work^" 

And the learned men sat long into the night 
and confabulated over their ponderings 


502 


  


and brought back three words 
^^Born, 
troubled, 
died " 

This was their history of Everyman 

''Give me next for my people/' spoke the head man, 

"m one word the inside kernel of all you know, 
the knowledge of your ten thousand books 
with a forecast of what will happen next— 
this for my people in one word ” 

And again they sat into the peep of dawn 
and the arguments raged 
and the glass prisms of the chandeliers shook 
and at last they came to a unanimous verdict 
and brought the head man one word 
"Maybe " 

And in that country and in other countries 
over mountain ranges where white clouds rested 
and beyond the blue sea and its endless tumblers 
the people by sunlight, by candlelight, by lanterns 
by the new white bulbs spoken to with buttons, 
the people had sayings touching the phrase 
"Born, troubled, died," 
carrying farther the one word "maybe," 
spacing values between serenity and anguish, 
from daily humdrum and the kitchen stove 
to the inevitable rainbow or evening star, 
sayings 

What should I say when it is better to say nothing? 

What is said is said and no sponge can wipe it out. 

Ask the young people— they know everything 
They say— what say they? Let them say. 

Have you noticed painted flowers give no smell? 

A woman and a melon are not to be known by their outsides 
The handsomest woman can give only what she has 
The miser and the pig are no use till dead 
An old man in love is a flower m winter 
Bean by bean we fill the sack 
Step by step one goes far 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


503 


No matter how important you are, you may get the measles 
Wash a dog, comb a dog, still a dog 
Fresh milk is not to be had from a statue 
Apes may put on finery but they are still apes 
Every man must eat his peck of dirt before he dies 
God knows well who are the best pilgrims 
The ache for glory sends free people into slavery 
He who IS made of honey will be eaten to death by flies 
No matter how cheap you make shoes geese will go barefoot 
He drives the wind from his house with his hat 

Wedlock IS a padlock 
Take a good look at the mother before 
getting tied up with the daughter 
Let a mother be ever so bad she wishes 
her daughter to be good 
The man hardly ever marries the woman 
he jokes about she often marries the 
man she laughs at 

Keep your eyes open before marriage, 
half-shut afterward 

In heaven an angel is nobody in particular 
Even if your stomach be strong, eat as few 
cockroaches as possible 
The curse of the Spanish gypsy May you be 
a mail carrier and have sore feet 
Well lathered is half shaved 

A wife is not a guitar you hang on the wall after playing it. 
The liar forgets 

A redheaded man in the orchestra is a sure sign 
of trouble 

The shabby genteel would better be m rags 
As sure as God made little apples he was busy 
as a cranberry merchant 
It will last about as long as a snowball in hell 
I wouldn't take a million dollars for this baby and 
I wouldn't give ten cents for another 

Blue eyes say love me or I die 

Black eyes say love me or I kill you 


The sun nses and sets in her eyes 
Wishes won’t wash dishes 
May all your children be acrobats 
Leave something to wish for 
Lips however rosy must be fed 
Some kill with a feather 
By night all cats are gray 
Life goes before we know what it is 
One fool IS enough in a house 
Even God gets tired of too much hallelujah 
Take it easy and live long as brothers. 

The baby’s smile pays the bill 

Yesterday is gone, tomorrow may never come, 
today IS here 

The sms of omission are those we should have 
committed and didn’t 

May you live to pick flowers off your enemies’ graves 
Some of them are so lazy they get up early in the morning 
so as to have more time to lay around and do nothing 
Some of them are dirty as a slut that’s too lazy to lick herself 
Let the guts be full for they carry the legs 
The hypocrite talks like a saint and hides his cat claws 
The half-wit was asked how he found the lost horse no others could 
locate and explained, “I thought to myself where I would go if I 
was a horse and I went there and he had ” 

He who has one foot in a brothel has another in a hospital 
When the boy is growing he has a wolf in his belly 
Handsome women generally fall into the hands of men not worth a 
second look 

When someone hits you with a rock hit him with a piece of cotton 
Love your neighbor as yourself but don’t take down your fence 
A fence should be horse-high, pig-tight, bull-strong 
Except in fairy stories the bashful get less 
A beggar’s hand has no bottom 
Polite words open iron gates 
Be polite but not too pohte 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


505 


50 

From what graveyards and sepulchers have they come, 
these given the public eye and ear 
who chatter idly of their personal success 
as though they flowered by themselves alone 

UT f> «T t> ttr 19 ' 

saying I, I, I, 

crediting themselves with advances and gams, 
did this, I did that,"' 
and hither and thither, ''It was me. Me,” 
the people, yes, the people, being omitted 
or being mentioned as incidental 
or failing completely of honorable mention, 
as though what each did was by him alone 
and there is a realm of personal achievement 
wherein he was the boss, the big boy, 
and it wasn't luck nor the breaks 
nor a convenient public 
but It was him, "I,” "Me,” 
and the idea and the inference is 
the pay and the praise should be his— 
from what graveyards have they strolled 
and do they realize their sepulchral manners 
and what are the farther backgrounds? 

Desecrate the landscape with your billboards, gentlemen. 

Let no green valleys meet the beholder's eye without 
Your announcements of gas, oil, beans, soup, whiskey, beer. 

Your proclamations of shaving cream, tooth-paste, pills, tonics. 

On the rocks and rugged hills, along clear streams and pastures 
Set up your billboard brag and swagger, your raucous yells 
Desecrate the landscape, gentlemen, go to it, hit 'em in the eye 
Sell 'em Make 'em eat it Sell 'em the name, the idea, the habit 
If a rock stands proud and grand anywhere sling your signs up on it 

The machine yes the machine 
never wastes anybody's time 
never watches the foreman 
never talks back 



never talks what is right or wrong 
never listens to others talking or if 
it does listen it doesn't hear 
never says we Ve been thinking, or, our 
feeling is like this 

the machine yes the machine cuts your production cost 

a man is a man and what can you do with him^ 

but a machine now you take a machine 

no kids no woman never hungry never thirsty 

all a machine needs is a little regular attention and plenty of grease 


We raise more corn 
to feed more hogs 
to buy more land 
to raise more corn 
to feed more hogs 
to 


Once there was a frontier Year by year it moved west At last it moved 
into the Pacific Ocean Word passed, 'The frontier is gone, there is 
no frontier any more" From then on no more frontiersmen, from 
then on only jokers advising, "Go west, young man " This was long 
after the old timers started west in covered wagons emblazoned "Ho 
for California" "Oregon or Death" or "The Eleventh Command- 
ment Mind Your Own Business " One with a sign reading "Pikes 
Peak or Bust" came back with another "Busted by Gosh’" And you 
can go now yes go now though the old frontiers are gone and the free 
homesteads are few Now you can stay where you are and send up 
rockets, let down buckets Now with less land you will have less 
children 


What happened in that buried city they 
found in Africa? 

Once it had streets and people and business 
and politics 

Once it saw the weddings of young men and 
women 

And the children cued "mama" as the first 
word 

And they had news from day to day of food, 
love, work, people 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


507 


Now it IS covered over with a level of snails, 
hills of snails 

The streets, houses, city hall, department of 
public works. 

Houses of money lenders, huts of the poor, 
tabernacles. 

Filled up and smoothed over by long proces- 
sions of snails. 

Legions of plodding thoughtless misbegotten 
snails 

'Isn’t that an iceberg on the horizon, Captain^” 

"Yes, Madam ” 

"What if we get m a collision with it?” 

"The iceberg. Madam, will move right along 
as though nothing had happened ” 

You can’t come back to a home unless it was a 
home you went away from 
Between hay and grass neither one nor the other 
Can’t you be useful as well as ornamental? 

Why don’t you go roll a peanut around the corner^ 

When did they let you out? 

The mules went to ask horns and came back without ears 
When you get hold of a good thing freeze onto it 
Nothing to do and all day to do it in 
So dumb he spent his last dollar buying a pocketbook to put it in. 

A little more sandpaper and this will be smooth 
Write on one side of the paper and both sides of the subject 
Swear to it on a stack of Bibles and they wouldn’t believe you 
Be not a baker if your head be of butter 
Yesterday? It’s a nickel thrown on a Salvation Army drum 
How could I let go when it was all I could do to hold on? 

Thousands drink themselves to death before one dies of thirst 
He didn’t have much till he married a hunk of tin 
There’s always a nut on every family tree 
The mosquitoes organized and drove me out of bed 
We’ll fight till hell freezes over and then write on the ice, ''Come on 
you bastards ” 

The yes-man spent his vacation yelling, "No^ no! I tell you No!” 


  


508 


A man having nothing to feed his cow sang to her of the fresh green 
grass to come this is the tune the old cow died on 

The man feeding a hatful of doughnuts to a horse explained to the 
curious, '1 want to see how many he'll eat before he asks for a cup 
of coffee " 

fired the man," said the new section boss, ''not because I had any- 
thing agin him but because I had the authority " 

''Don't I argue? Don't I sputify?" the backwoods preacher inquired of 
the complaining committee whose chairman responded, "Yes, you 
do argue and you do sputify but you don't tell wheremi" 

The late riser is asked, "Are you up for all day?" 

Shut the door— do you want to heat all outdoors? 

He won't go to a wedding unless he's the bride nor a funeral unless he's 
the corpse 

"May you have the sevenyear itch," was answered, "I hope your wife eats 
crackers in bed " 

He was always a hell of a big fellow m Washington when he was in 
Rhode Island and a hell of a big fellow in Rhode Island when he was 
m Washington 

You say you are going to Warsaw (or Boston) because you want me to 
think you are going to Lemberg (or Buffalo) but I know you are going 
to Warsaw (or Boston) 

He got on a horse and rode off in all directions at once 

Did they let you out or did you let yourself out? 

"Why’" said a Republican Governor of Illinois, "Why the Democrats 
can't run the government’ It's all us Republicans can do " 

This will last a thousand years and after that to the end of the world 

When a member died the newspaper men of the Whitechapel Club of 
Chicago gave the toast 

"Hurrah for the next who goes’" 

In Vermont a shut-mouthed husband finally broke forth to his wife, 
"When I think of how much you have meant to me all these years, 
it is almost more than I can do sometimes to keep from telling you so " 


51 

The blood of all men of all nations being red 
the Communist International named red its banner color 
Pope Innocent IV gave cardinals their first red hats 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


509 


saying a cardmars blood belonged to the holy mother church 
The bloodcolor red is a symbol 

A Scotsman keeps the Sabbath and anything else he can lay his hands on, 
say the English 

A fighting Frenchman runs away from even a she-goat, say the Germans 

A Russian, say the Poles, can be cheated only by a gypsy, a gypsy by a Jew, 
a Jew by a Greek, and a Greek by the devil 

'If I owned Texas and hell I would rent Texas and move to hell,’" said 
a famous general 

"That’s right,” wrote a Texas editor "Every man for his own country ” 

The Peloponnesians pulled these long ago, so did the Russians, the Chi- 
nese, even the Fijis with rings in their noses Likewise. 

An American is an Anglo-Saxon when an Englishman wants something 
from him or 

When a Frenchman has drunk too much he wants to dance, a German to 
sing, a Spaniard to gamble, an Italian to brag, an Irishman to fight, 
an American to make a speech or 

"What is dumber than a dumb Irishman^” "A smart Swede ” 

These are m all tongues and regions of men Often they bring laughter and 
sometimes blood 

The propagandas of hate and war always monkey with the buzz-saw of race 
and nationality, breed and km, seldom saying, "When m doubt hold 
your tongue ” 

In breathing spells of bloody combat between Christian nations the order 
goes out "Don’t let the men m the front-line trenches fraternize^” 

The sea has fish for every man 
Every blade of grass has its share of dew 
The longest day must have its end 
Man’s life? A candle in the wind, hoar-frost 
on stone 

Nothing more certain than death and nothing 
more uncertain than the hour 
Men live like birds together m a wood, when 
the time comes each takes his flight 
As wave follows wave, so new men take old 
men’s places 

The copperfaces, the red men, handed us tobacco, 
the weed for the pipe of friendship, 


510 


  


also the bah-tah-to, the potato, the spud 
Sunflowers came from Peruvians m ponchos 
Early Italians taught us of chestnuts, 
walnuts and peaches being Persian mementoes, 

Siberians finding for us what rye might do, 

Hindus coming through with the cucumber, 

Egyptians giving us the onion, the pea, 

Arabians handing advice with one gift 
''Some like it, some say it's ]ust spinach 
To the Chinese we have given 
kerosene, bullets, bibles 

and they have given us radishes, soy beans, silk, 
poems, paintings, proverbs, porcelain, egg foo yong, 
gunpowder. Fourth of July firecrackers, fireworks, 
and labor gangs for the first Pacific railways 
Now we may thank these people 
or reserve our thanks 
and speak of them as outsiders 
and imply the request, 

"Would you just as soon get off the earth?"' 
holding ourselves aloof in pride of distinction 
saying to ourselves this costs us nothing 
as though hate has no cost 
as though hate ever grew anything worth growing 
Yes we may say this trash is beneath our notice 
or we may hold them in respect and affection 
as fellow creepers on a commodious planet 
saying, "Yes you too you too are people " 

"When God finished making the world 
He had a few stinking scraps of mud left over 
and used it to make a yellow dog" 

(and when they hate any race or nation 
they name that race or nation 
in place of the yellow dog) 

They say and they say and the juice of prejudice drips from it 
They say and they say and m the strut of fool pnde spit m the wind 
And the first of the seven rottenmg sms is this one pnde 
They set up a razzle-dazzle and get caught in their own revolving mirrors 
"We are the greatest city, the greatest people Nothing like us ever was 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


5^1 

They set out for empire not knowing men and nations can die of empire 
And the earth is strewn with the burst bladders of the puffed-iip 

The best preacher is the heart, 
say the Jews of faith 
The best teacher is time 
The best book is the world 
The best friend is God 

The three worst waters, 
say the Irish 

brown ram at the fall of the leaf, 
black ram at the springing of roots, 
the gray rain of May 

Love, a cough, an itch, or a fat paunch cannot be hid 
Love, a cough, smoke, money or poverty, are hard to hide 

Three things you can't nurse an old woman, a hen, and a sheep 
Three who have their own way a mule, a pig, and a miser 
Three to stay away from a snake, a man with an oily tongue, and a loose 
woman 

Three things dear to have fresh eggs, hickory smoked ham, and old 
women's praise 

Three things always pleasing a cat's kittens, a goat's kid, and a young 
woman 

The three prettiest dead a little child, a salmon, a black cock 
Three of the coldest things a man's knee, a cow's horn, and a dog's nose 
Three who come unbidden love, jealousy, fear 

Three soon passing away the beauty of a woman, the rainbow, the echo 
of the woods 

Three worth wishing knowledge, gram, and friendship 

Men are made of clay but women are made of men 
An old friend is better than two new ones 
He gets up early who pleases everybody 
Two fools in a house are a couple too many 
'1 have forgotten your name" is better than “I don't 
remember you " 



512 


  


Some can eat nails, others break their teeth on apple- 
sauce 

'"Run home, your house is on fire ''No, that can't be 
I locked the house when I left home " 

"So now he's dead " "Yes " "What did he die of?" 
"The want of breath " 

There are two good men, say the Chinese, one dead, 
the other not born yet 

The seller can get along with one eye, the buyer 
needs a hundred 

The ragged colt may prove a good horse 
The hasty bitch brings forth blind whelps 

He's eaten off many a dish and never washed a dish 
He's the sort that would haul rock with a race-horse 
It would be like him to drown m a spoonful of water 
If he had learned the hatter's trade, men would have 
been born without heads 
Ugly? Sleep stays away from him till he 
covers his face 

Poor? He can't raise money enough to buy 
lumber for a backhouse 
Big feet? Buying shoes he don't ask for a 
number, he says, "Lemme see the biggest 
you got " 


"Slave, I have bought you 
"God knows you have " 
"Now you belong to me " 
"God knows I do" 

"And you'll not run away?" 
"God knows " 

In the days of the faroff Pharaohs 
in the days of Nebuchadnezzar 
the king who ate grass 
and reconsidered many former decisions— 
one of the masters straddling a slave 
"I think about you often 
and I would be willing 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


513 

to do many kind things 
almost anything for you” 

And the man under 

“Almost anything except get off my back ” 

52 

Who was that early sodbuster in Kansas? He leaned at the gatepost and 
studied the horizon and figured what corn might do next year and 
tried to calculate why God ever made the grasshopper and why two 
days of hot winds smother the life out of a stand of wheat and why 
there was such a spread between what he got for gram and the price 
quoted in Chicago and New York Drove up a newcomer in a covered 
wagon 'What kind of folks live around here?"' 'Well, stranger, what 
kind of folks was there in the country you come from?’' "Well, they 
was mostly a lowdown, lying, thieving, gossiping, backbiting lot of 
people ” 'Well, I guess, stranger, that’s about the kind of folks you’ll 
find around here ” And the dusty gray stranger had just about blended 
into the dusty gray cottonwoods in a clump on the horizon when 
another newcomer drove up "What kind of folks live around here?" 
"Well, stranger, what kind of folks was there in the country you come 
from?" "Well, they was mostly a decent, hardworking, lawabiding, 
friendly lot of people ’’ "Well, I guess, stranger, that’s about the kind 
of folks you’ll find around here ’’ And the second wagon moved off 
and blended with the dusty gray cottonwoods on the honzon while 
the early sodbuster leaned at his gatepost and tried to figure why two 
days of hot winds smother the life out of a nice stand of wheat 

In the dry farming country they said 
"Here you look farther and see less, 
and there are more creeks and less water, 
and more cows and less milk, 
and more horses and less grass, 
than anywhere else m the world ’’ 

White man "I have no time to do anything ’’ 

Indian "Why you have all the time there 
IS, haven’t you?" 

They said to the cows, "When you die we will 
wrap you in fine linen sheets " 


  


5H 

The cows 'We shall be satisfied if we keep 
our hides 

Of one piece of Pennsylvania a Quaker poet wrote 

''God might have made a more beautiful region than Chester County— 
but He never did 

An Oklahoma newspaper woman rewrote it "God might have made a 
more beautiful country than Oklahoma— but He never did 

All flesh is grass From the sod the grazers derive their food and pass it 
on to man Out of the grasslands man takes his meat and milk and 
lives Wherever is a rich banquet it goes back to the grass Howso- 
ever men break bread together or eat alone it is grass giving them life 
and they could pray "Give us this day our daily grass '' 

And many, many are the grass families From oats and corn to blue grass 
and timothy hay, from rye and rice to clover and alfalfa, the grass 
families are many and humble and hard to kill unless misused and 
overdriven The populations of the grass are lush and green with care 
m the sun and ram and recurring seasons The grass carries benedic- 
tions and fables of service, toil and misuse To whom does the grass 
belong if not to the people? 


53 

Come on, superstition, and get my goat 
I got mascots 

The stars of my birthday favor me 
The numbers from one to ten are with me 
I was bom under a luchy star and nothing can stop me 
The moon was a waxing moon and not a waning moon when I was bom 
Every card in the deck and both of the seven-deven bones are with me 
So you hear them tell it and they mean if it works it’s good and if it don’t 
it costs nothing 

How to win love, how to win games, the spells and conjurabons are named 
for fever, bums, convulsions, snakebite, milksick, balking horses, rheu- 
matism, warts 

“Tie the heart of a bat with a red silk stnng to your nght arm and you 
will win every game at which you play ” 

If your nght foot itches you will soon start on a journey, if it’s your left 
foot you will go where you are not wanted 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


515 


If you sing before breakfast you will cry before night, if you sneeze before 
breakfast you will see your true love before Saturday night 
Lightning in the north means rain, lightning in the south means dry 
weather 

Frost three months after the first katydid is heard Three white frosts and 
then a ram 

For toothache the faith doctor wrote the words ''galla gaffa gassa'' on the 
wall With a nail he pointed at each letter of the words, asking if the 
toothache was better At the letter where the tooth was feeling easier 
he drove the nail in and the tooth stopped aching Galla gaffa gassa 
Gassa galla gaffa 

Goofer dust comes from the goofer tree 
Sprinkle it in the shoes of the woman you love and 
she can never get away from you 
Galla gaffa gassa 

Even a lousy cur has his lucky days 
Sweep dirt out of the door after night and 
you sweep yourself out of a home 
Shake the tablecloth out of doors after sunset 
and you will never marry 
The first to drive a hearse is the next to die 
Kill cats, dogs or frogs and you die in rags 
Point at a shooting star or even speak of it and 
you lose your next wish 

Better born lucky than rich 

Marry in May, repent always 

May IS the month to marry bad wives 

The son of the white hen bnngs luck 
So does a horse with four white feet 

He planted gravel and up came potatoes 
When a bitch litters pigs that is luck 
The lucky fellow gets eggs from his rooster 
and his hen eggs have two yolks 
Luck for the few, death for the many 


5i6 


  


Ladders of luck, let us 
climb your yellow rungs 
Ropes of the up-and-up 
send us silver sky-hooks 
Black horses, let us saddle 
you with silk belly-bands 
Black cats with orange spots 
bring us big ships loaded 
with wild Spanish women 
Galloping cubes of fate 
hand us sevens elevens 
hand us the pretty numbers 
Black moonlight, let a little 
of that old gold drop down 
Black roses^ Yes 
there must be cool black roses 
Out of the deep night came to us all 
the kiss of the black rose 

54 

Tylor believed it important, he put it down, he asks us to read it, to look 
at it and see what happens 

“In the islands of the Indian Archipelago whose tropical forests swarm 
both with high apes and low savages, the confusion between the two 
in the minds of the half-civilized inhabitants becomes almost inex 
tricable 

Tylor dwelt on the tales of men with tails, homo caudatus or satyr, how 
you hear about them if you go hither and yon over the earth 

“To people who at once believe monkeys a kind of savages, and savages a 
kind of monkeys, men with tails are creatures coming under both defi 
nitions '' 

The longer you look at it the more the confusions shift in the shaded 
areas denoting who belongs where 

55 

On Lang Syne Plantation they had a prayer 

“When we nse in the morning 

to see the sun plowing his funow across the elements, 


5^7 

we are thankful 

For the rising of the east moon we have seen tonight 
and for the setting of the west moon we shall see, 
we are thankful 
And O Lord— 

When my room is like a public hall, 
when my face is like a looking-glass, 
when my teeth shut against a silence, 
mother do me no good then, 
father do me no good then, 
sister, brother, friend, do me no good then 
Help us to know— 

when our hands rest from the plow handle and he still— 
when we are like hills gone down m darkness— 
when our nostrils are empty of breath- 
then let us know when we trust in Thee— 

Thou art a crutch to the lame, 
a mother to the motherless, 
a father to the fatherless, 
a strong arm to the widow, 
a shade from the heat, 
a bridge over deep water 

The little lake with the long name in Massachusetts is called Chaugh 
Jog a Gog Maugh Chaugh a Gog Chaugh Buna Guncha Maugh 
wherein the red men intended We own to the middle of the lake on 
this side, you own to the middle of the lake on the other side, and 
both of us own the middle 

Oh angel, oh angel, 

I don't want to be buried m the storm 
Who's going to close these dying eyes? 

Dig my grave with a golden spade 
Lower me down with a silver chain 
The coffin lid will screw me down 
I don't want to be buried in the storm 
Who's going to close these dying eyes? 

Oh angel, oh angel 


THE PEOPLE, YES 



5i8 


  


56 

The sacred legion of the justborn— 

how many tliousands born this minute? 

how many fallen for soon burial? 

what are these deaths and replacements? 

what IS this endless shuttling of shadowlands 

where the spent and done go marching into one 

and from another arnve those crying Mama Mama? 

In the people is the eternal child, 

the wandering gypsy, the pioneer homeseeker, 

the singer of home sweet home 

The people say and unsay, 

put up and tear down 

and put together again— 

a builder, wrecker, and builder again— 

this is the people 

The shrouding of obedience to immediate necessity, 

The mask of ''What do I care?” to cover "What else can I do?” 

One half-real face put on to hide a more real face under. 

The waiting of the hope of the inner face while the outer face 
Holds to its look and says yes to immediate necessity. 

Says yes to whatever is for the immediate moment— 

This IS the pokerface of the populace never read till long afterward 

The people m several longdrawn chapters seems a monster turtle 
Heavy years go by, heavy hundreds of years, till a shroud and mask drop. 
Till the faces of events command the new faces of people, 

And new chapters begin with new faces 

Protective coloration is only for birds and moths who take on the look 
of the leaves and bark they live m? 

Out of long usage the ruled-over acquire devices by the ways of animals 
who blend with the landscape 

They can drop into long deep sleeps, they can hide out and hibernate till 
a time of release develops 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


5^9 


In the long night streets of snakehne lights 
when there is bitter crying for leadership 
and no leadership steps forth 
IS it because the masses and the intelligentsia 
both are a wornout soil so thin and acrid 
they cannot fling up leaders? 

When the creative breath blows not over the waters 
and elders are filled with hypocntical eflBuvia, 
when the silent workers in pure science 
are considered inferior to public utility manipulators 
IS this the time for the young to begin movements, 
to question the ways of hypocritical elders 
in the long night streets of snakehne lights? 

aw nuts aw go peddle yer papers 
where did ja cop dat monkeyface 
jeez ja see dat skirt 
did ja glom dat moll 
who was telhn you we wuz brudders 
how come ya get on dis side deh street 
go home and tell yer mudder she wants yuh 
chase yer shadder aroun deh comer 
yuh come to me wid a lot uh arkymalarky 
a bing m de bean fer you yeah 
how come ya get on dis side deh street 
go home and get yer umbreller washed 
den get yer face lifted 
dis corner is mine—see— dis comer is mine 
gwan ja tink ya gonna get dis f m me fer nuttin 
nobody gets nuttin fer nuttin 
gwan monkeyface peddle yer papers 
ya can't kiss yerself m here dis is all fixed 

Those without a leader pensh, 
says the Sanskrit, 

those without a youthful leader perish, 
those without a female leader pensh, 
those without many leaders perish 

The people pause for breath, for wounds and bruises to heal. 
For food again after famine, for regaining stamina. 



520 


  


For preparations and migration to greener pastures, to canaan, to america, 
to the argentine, australia, new Zealand, alaska. 

To farflung commonwealths lacking precedent or tradition 
They guess and toil and rest and try to make out and get along 
And some would rather not talk about what they had to go through 
In the first years of finding out what the soil might do for them. 

In the first winter of snow too deep for travel, or 

The first summer when the few clouds showing went away without rain, or 
The day the grasshoppers came and tore a black path where the crops had 
stood 

The people is a monolith, 
a mover, a dirt farmer, 
a desperate hoper 

The prize liar comes saying, '1 know how, listen to me and Fll bring you 
through 

The guesser comes saying, 'The way is long and hard and maybe what I 
offer will work out '' 

The people choose and the people's choice more often than not is one 
more washout 

Yet the strong man, the priceless one who wants nothing for himself and 
has his roots among his people. 

Comes often enough for the people to know him and to win through into 
gains beyond later losing. 

Comes often enough so the people can look back and say, "We have come 
far and will go farther yet " 

The people is a trunk of patience, a monolith. 

"And the king wanted an inscription 
good for a thousand years and after 
that to the end of the world?" 

"Yes, precisely so " 

"Something so true and awful that no 
matter what happened it would stand?" 

"Yes, exactly that" 

"Something no matter who spit on it or 
laughed at it there it would stand 
and nothing would change it?" 

"Yes, that was what the king ordered 
his wise men to write " 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


521 


''And what did they write?'" 

"Five words this too shall pass away"' 


57 

Lincoln? 

He was a mystery in smoke and flags 
saying yes to the smoke, yes to the flags, 
yes to the paradoxes of democracy, 
yes to the hopes of government 
of the people by the people for the people, 
no to debauchery of the public mind, 
no to personal malice nursed and fed, 
yes to the Constitution when a help, 
no to the Constitution when a hindrance, 
yes to man as a struggler amid illusions, 
each man fated to answer for himself 
Which of the faiths and illusions of mankind 
must I choose for my own sustaining light 
to bring me beyond the present wilderness? 

Lincoln? was he a poet? 
and did he write verses? 

"I have not willingly planted a thorn 
m any man's bosom " 

"I shall do nothing through malice, what 
I deal with is too vast for malice " 

Death was in the air 
So was birth 

What was dying few could say 
What was being born none could know 

He took the wheel in a lashing roaring 
hurricane 

And by what compass did he steer the course 
of the ship? 

"My policy is to have no policy," he said in 
the early months, 

And three years later, "I have been controlled 
by events " 


^22   

He could play with the wayward human mind, saying at Charleston, Illi- 
nois, September i8, 1858, it was no answer to an argument to call a 
man a liar 

“I assert that you [pointing a finger in the face of a man in the crowd] 
are here today, and you undertake to prove me a liar by showing that 
you were in Mattoon yesterday 

''I say that you took your hat off your head and you prove me a liar by 
putting it on your head 

He saw personal liberty across wide horizons 

'"Our progress m degeneracy appears to me to be pretty rapid,'' he wrote 
Joshua F Speed, August 24, 1855 ''As a nation we began by declar- 
ing that 'all men are created equal, except negroes ' When the Know- 
Nothings get control, it will read 'all men are created equal except 
negroes and foreigners and Catholics ' When it comes to this, I shall 
prefer emigrating to some country where they make no pretense of 
loving liberty " 

Did he look deep into a crazy pool 
and see the strife and wrangling 
with a clear eye, writing the military 
head of a stormswept area 
"If both factions, or neither, shall abuse 
you, you will probably be about nght Be- 
ware of being assailed by one and praised 
by the other"? 

Lincoln? was he a historian? 
did he know mass chaos? 
did he have an answer for those 
who asked him to organize chaos? 

"Actual war coming, blood grows hot, and blood is spilled Thought is 
forced from old channels into confusion Deception breeds and 
thrives Confidence dies and universal suspicion reigns 

"Each man feels ah impulse to kill his neighbor, lest he be first killed by 
him Revenge and retaliation follow And all this, as before said, may 
be among honest men only, but this is not all 

"Every foul bird comes abroad and everj^ dirty reptile rises up. These add 
crime to confusion. 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


523 


''Strong measures, deemed indispensable, but harsh at best, such men 
make worse by maladministration Murders for old grudges, and mur- 
ders for pelf, proceed under any cloak that will best cover for the 
occasion These causes amply account for what has happened m Mis- 
souri 

Early m '64 the Committee of the New York Workingman's Democratic 
Republican Association called on him with assurances and he medi- 
tated aloud for them, recalling race and draft riots 
"The most notable feature of a disturbance m your city last summer 
was the hanging of some working people by other working people 
It should never be so 

"The strongest bond of human sympathy, outside of the family rela- 
tion, should be one uniting all working people, of all nations 
and tongues and kindreds 

"Let not him who is houseless pull down the house of another, but let 
him labor diligently and build one for himself, thus by example 
assuring that his own shall be safe from violence when built" 

Lincoln? did he gather 

the feel of the American dream 

and see its kindred over the earth? 

"As labor is the common burden of our race, 

so the effort of some to shift 

their share of the burden 

onto the shoulders of others 

is the great durable curse of the race " 

'1 hold, 

if the Almighty had ever made a set of men 

that should do all of the eating 

and none of the work, 

he would have made them 

with mouths only, and no hands, 

and if he had ever made another class, 

that he had intended should do all the work 

and none of the eating, 

he would have made them 

without mouths and all hands " 


  


524 


' —the same spirit that says, 'You toil and 
work and earn bread, and Fll eat it ' No 
matter in what shape it comes, whether 
from the mouth of a king who seeks to 
bestride the people of his own nation 
and live by the fruit of their labor, or 
from one race of men as an apology for 
enslaving another race, it is the same 
tyrannical principle” 

"As I would not be a slave, so I would not 
be a master This expresses my idea of 
democracy Whatever differs from this, 
to the extent of the difference, is no de> 
mocracy ” 

"I never knew a man who wished to be him- 
self a slave Consider if you know any 
good thing that no man desires for him- 
self” 

"The sheep and the wolf 

are not agreed upon a definition 
of the word liberty” 

"The whole people of this nation 
will ever do well 
if well done by ” 

"The plainest print cannot be read 
through a gold eagle ” 

"How does it feel to be President?” an Illi- 
nois friend asked 

“Well, I’m like the man they rode out of 
town on a rail He said if it wasn’t for 
the honor of it he would just as soon 
walk” 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


525 


Lincoln^ he was a dreamer 
He saw ships at sea, 
he saw himself living and dead 
in dreams that came 

Into a secretary's diary December 23, 1863 
went an entry ''The President tonight 
had a dream He was in a party of plain 
people, and, as it became known who 
he was, they began to comment on his 
appearance One of them said 'He is a 
very common-looking man ' The Presi- 
dent replied 'The Lord prefers com- 
mon-looking people That is the reason 
he makes so many of them ' " 

He spoke one verse for then and now 
"If we could first know where we are, 
and whither we are tending, 
we could better judge 
what to do, and how to do it " 

58 

The people, yes. 

Out of what is their change 
from chaos to order 
and chaos again? 

"Yours till the hangman doth us part," 

Don Magregor ended his letters 

"It annoys me to die," 
said a philosopher 

"I should like to see what follows " 

To those who had ordered them to death, 

one of them said 

"We die because the people are asleep 
and you will die because the people will awaken " 


5^6 


  


Greek met Greek when Phocion and Democritus spoke 

“You will dnve the Athenians mad some day and they will kill you ” 

“Yes, me when they go mad, and as sure as they get sane again, you ” 

59 

The transient tar-paper shack 
comes from the hands of the people 
So does the floodlighted 
steel-and-concrete skyscraper 

The rough-lumber two-room houseboat 

IS from the hands of the people 

So IS the turbine-driven steamboat 

with ballroom, orchestra, swimming-pool, 

the fat of the land, 

moving in the mid-atlantic ocean 

Every day the people of the city haul it away, 
take it apart, and put it together again 
Every day around the globe and its atmos- 
pheric fnnge the people of the earth live 
the unwntten saga of one day 
Today the fishing boats go out and little men 
shade their eyes and study the treacher- 
ous, rolling, free-handed sea 
Today the steel-and-aluminum streamlined 
passenger train cuts through a blizzard, 
the transcontinental planes are hung up, 
and a liner at sea sends a distress wireless. 

Today strikes break out where stakes were 
never heard of before, the lumber trade 
stands in fear of steel-fabncated houses, 
and farming in Somaliland is a hazard 
Every hour thousands of six-decker novels 
lived, every minute millions of long and 
short stones 

Today homes are lost, farms won, cars traded 
in, old furniture lacquered, pigs littered, 
an albatross shot, pearls lost in Vienna 
found in a fishcan m Omaha. 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


527 


Today jobs landed and lost, contracts signed 
and broken, families scattered and joined, 
girls after long waiting saying Yes to men 
No to men 

The books of man have begun only a short 
stammering memorandum of the toil, 
resources and stamina of man, 

Of the required errands, the dramatic impulses, 
the irresistible songs of this given moment, 
this eyeblmk now 

Every day the people of the city haul it away, 
take it apart, and put it together again 
The how and the why of the people so doing 
is the saga not yet wntten 

Is the story true or a make-believe^ 

In an ancient clan the elders found one of the 
younger, a man of dreaminess, writing a 
scroll and record 

Where he had picked up letters and the for- 
bidden art of putting down one word 
after another so as to make sense, they 
didn't know and he refused to tell 
On sheets to be read long after by other 
generations he was doing an eye-witness 
tale of their good and evil doings 
And he swore to them '1 will be the word of 
the people^ Mine is the bleeding mouth 
from which the gag is snatched*" 

So they took and killed him and set his bloody 
head on a pike for public gaze Who had 
asked him to be the word of the people^ 
When they wanted a history written they 
would elect someone to wnte it as they 
would have it wntten 

'Tou will see me surrender,” 
said one old Viking, 

' Vhen hair grows in the palm of my hand ” 





528 


  


''What are you fellows scared of^ nothing?'' 
this too they asked the old Viking who said, 

"Yes, one thing we are scared of, we are scared 
the sky might come tumbling down on us " 

60 

The grass lives, goes to sleep, lives again, 
and has no name for it 

The oaks and poplars know seasons while standing 
to take what comes 

The grinding of the earth on its gnarled axis 
touches many dumb brothers 
Time toils on translations of fire and ram into 
air, into thin air 

In the casual diift of routine 

in the day by day run of mine 

in the play of careless circumstance 

the anecdotes emerge 

alive with people in words, enands, 

motives and silhouettes 

taller than the immediate moment 

"You have fourteen sons in the war?" 

"Yes " 

"And you have more children at home?" 

"Five " 

"And they all came one by one?" 

"No, they was four pair twins, two sets triplets " 

"I remember," said the fond Irish mother to the white- 
headed boy, "I remember when you was nothing but a 
beautiful gleam m your father's eye " 

"Breath is made out of air," wrote the schoolboy 
"We breathe with our lungs If it wasn't for our breath we 
would die when we slept Our breath keeps the life go- 
ing through the nose when we sleep " 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


529 


Back and forth strode the campaign orator, 
back and forth till an Irishman shouted 
“If you're talkin' stop walkin'* 

If you're walkin' stop talkin'*" 

The classical orator from Massachusetts had pronounced the words “Vox 
Popuh" five times in an Indianapolis speech when one Hoosier Con- 
gressman bet another he didn't know what Vox Popuh meant The 
money was put up and the winner of the bet freely translated Vox 
Popuh to mean “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?" 

“There on the same track I saw the westbound passenger tram coming 
fifty miles an hour and the eastbound freight forty miles an hour " 
“And what did you think?" 

“I thought what a hell of a way to run a railroad*" 

“Is you married?" the elder negro asked his son 
“I ain't saym' I is and I ain't sayin' I ain't " 

“I ain't askin' you is you ain't Ise askin' you ain't you is ' 

They were ninety years old and of their seventeen children had just buried 
the firstborn son who died seventy-two years of age 
“I told you," said the old man as he and his hillborn wife sat on the cabin 
steps in the evening sunset, “I told you long ago we would never raise 
that boy " 

“I am John Jones " 

“Take a chair" 

“Yes, and I am the son of John 
Throckmorton Jones " 

“Is that possible? Take two chairs " 

“What's the matter up there?" 

“Playing soldier " 

“But soldiers don't make that kind of noise " 

“We're playing the kind of soldier that 
makes that kind of noise " 

“No, captain, I never stole nothing to eat out 
of that chest Why, captain, when I 


530 


  


looked m that chest to see if there was 
anything to eat in it I met a cockroach 
coming out of it with tears in his eyes ” 

*'How do you do, my farmer friend?"' 

"Howdy" 

"Nice looking country you have here " 

"Fer them that likes it” 

"Live here all your life?” 

"Notyit” 

61 

The nickels click off fares in the slot machines of the subway, the elevated 
"Fare, please,” say the bus conductors to millions every day of the week 
Riders they are, riders to work, to home, to fun, to grief, each nickel and 
dime audited and accounted for as current income payable for taxes, 
overhead, upkeep, rehabilitation, surplus, dividends, flimflam 
To the whang and purr of steel and motors, streets and stations, the fares, 
the riders, with nickels and dimes, go and return, return and go 
One in a thousand says, "Whither goest thou?” but mostly "Where you 
going?” 

Mostly they are in accord with the Minnesota Swede 
"Maybe I don't know so much but what I do know I know to beat hell ” 
Like tools tested for grinding and cutting and durability, they have gath- 
ered them clews of wisdom and they talk things over in the bus, the 
elevated, the subway 

"The penitentiary is to leam to behave better, to think things over, 
it IS lonesome ” 

"A comedian acts funny and gets paid to make people laugh if he 
can ” 

"Shakespeare is the greatest wnter of them all, a dead Englishman 
and you have to read him m high school or you don't pass ” 
"The police pass examinations and then get a club and a star to 
show who they are They keep order and arrest you unless you 
got a pull ” 

"Handkerchief is to carry m the pocket and blow your nose with and 
tie nickels in the corner of for carfare and church ” 

"Economy is when you save without being stingy,” 

"Banks keep money when you have some left over. They let nobody 
else get it And they let you take money out if you pay for it and 
do what IS regular.” 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


53i 


‘The Constitution tells how the government runs It is a paper in 
Washington for the lawyers '' 

“War IS when two nations go to it killing as many as you can for the 
government ” 

“The army is men m uniforms, they go away and fight till they come 
back or you hear from them '' 

“The president is the same as a king four years signing bills in the 
White House and meeting people He can do whatever he wants 
to unless he is stopped '' 

“Oath IS what you swear to in court that you will tell everything God 
help you and hold nothing back no matter what '' 

“Poverty is when you work hard, live cheap and can't pay up, you 
figure and you can't tell where you're coming out at " 

“Liberty is when you are free to do what you want to do and the 
police never arrest you if they know who you are and you got 
the right ticket " 

“The past is long ago and you can't touch it Tomorrow today will 
be yesterday and belong in the past, like that, see?" 

The ingenuity of the human mind and what passes the time of day 
for the millions who keep their serenity amid the relentless proc- 
esses of wresting their provender from the clutch of tongs or- 
ganized against them-— this is always interesting and sometimes 
marvelous 

Daily IS death and despair stood off by those who in hard tnals know 
how and when to laugh 

The fox counts hens in his dreams The eagle has an empire in the 
air Man under his hat has several possessions of comedy 

The name of a stub line under the Lone Star banner is The Houston 
Eastern and Western Texas railroad 

On the passenger and freight cars is the monogram, the initials 
H E W T 

And nearly everybody m the territory traversed and the adjacent right 
of way calls it “Hell Either Way you Take It " 

The Never Did and Couldn't railway is the N D & C Newburgh, 
Duchess and Connecticut 

The Delay Linger and Wait is the D L & W , the Delaware, Lacka- 
wanna and Western 


53 ^ 


  


Come Boys and Quit Railroading ran the slogan of the 1888 engineers' 
strike on the C B & Q RR , the Chicago Burlington & Quincv 
Rail Road 

The floors of the new horse stables were translucent tile, the drink- 
ing fountains of marble, the mangers of mahogany, the feed- 
boxes furbished with silver trimmings and inlays 
'Well, gentlemen," said the proprietor to his inspecting friends, "is 
there anything you can think of that is lacking^" 

"I can think of nothing," said an irreverent one, "unless you want 
to put in a sofa for each horse " 

62 

Without the daily chores of the people 
the milk trucks would have no milk 
the markets neither meat nor potatoes 
the railroad and bus timetables 
would be on the fritz 
and the shippers saying, "Phooey^" 

And daily the chores are done 

with heavy toil here, light laughter there, 

the chores of the people, yes 

In a drought year when one dust storm came 
chasing another across a western town 
Out of a Santa Fe day coach a passenger stuck 
his head and queried a citizen 
"What's the name of this mean measly dirty 
dreary dned-up low-down burg?" 

The citizen responding, "That's near enough, 
stranger, let it go at that " 

When the railway stockholder reminded the 
brakeman of orders to call stations in a 
clear tenor voice, the brakeman inquired 
"What kind of a tenor voice do you ex- 
pect for forty dollars a month?" 

The meat wholesaler took m hand one of his 
salesmen "You've got a bright head and 


THE PEOPLE, YE S 


533 


your ideas run away with you Don't be 
so bright when you tackle a customer Be 
dumb Look dumb They will appreciate 
you better that way ” 

On a Baton Rouge headstone they carved 
His last words were 
'T die as I lived— 
a Christian and a Democrat " 

An Arkansas huckleberry cavalry commander 
got his men into action with 
''Prepare to git on your creeters— gitl" 

"How many of yez down m the pit?" 

"Five " 

"The half of yez come up and be quick " 

"Men, will yez fight or will yez run?" 

"We will " 

"Yez will what?" 

"We will not" 

"I thought yez would " 

The restaurant cashier glanced at the check 
he handed her and told him "I am very sorry 
but we have an arrangement with the banks 
that they don't sell soup and we don't take 
checks " 

Phone girl "I'm sorry I gave you the wrong number " 
Man "I'm sorry too, I know it was a perfectly good 
number you gave me but I just couldn't use it " 

"I'd hate to be up there in that," murmured one studying 
an airplane in a tailspm, another murmuring, "I'd hate 
to be up there and not be in that " 

Man going up elevator 

"We eat, work, sleep, then we die— eh?" 

Elevator boy "Yeah." 


534 


  


The people laugh 
From a light easy humming 
to the raucous guffaw and the brutal jeer 
the people laugh 
The decisions of the people 
as to how they shall laugh and when 
and how loud and at whom and how long— 

This IS not covered in the vaudevilhans saying 
every audience is ninety per cent squirrels 
and ten per cent nuts and the squirrels are 
more to be considered than the nuts, almost 
an axiom comes from the same vaudevilhans 
what in one hour entertains and goes over big 
in another hour starts a not the old reliable 
jokes fail hokum demands a new formula 
the query runs, 'What are they laughing at this 
year?'' 

'We got butter and we got the Kaiser," taunted the Dutch boy across 
the border 

'We got Hitler," argued the German lad from his side of the fence be- 
neonate the two countries 

"We got butter, we got the Kaiser," repeated the Dutch boy, "and we're 
going to get Hitler " 

"Have you a criminal lawyer in this burg?" 

"We think so but we haven't been able to prove 
it on him " 

"What's become of your two boys that grew up 
since I saw you last?" 

"One is dead and the other is m the real estate 
business in Wichita " 

"Am I the first girl you ever kissed?" 

"No, but I want you to know I am a lot more 
particular than I used to be " 

The Kansas City girl out of finishing school "If you've got the right 
kind of a face and personality you don't need the education and if 
you haven't got the face and personality you can never get educa- 
tion enough " 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


535 


^^Yesterday, said the college boy home on vacation, ^‘we autoed to the 
country club, golfed till dark, bridged a while, and autoed home'' 

'^Yesterday, said the father, ^‘I muled to the cornfield and gee-hawed till 
sundown, then I suppered till dark, piped till nine, bedsteaded till 
five, breakfasted and went muling again " 

A farmhand seeing the letters 'T C" in a 
dream asked if it meant “Preach Christ," 
his pastor counseling, “Perhaps it means 
Plow Corn " 

Even those who have read books on manners are sometimes a pain in the 
neck 

If there is a bedbug in a hotel when I arrive he looks at the register for 
my room number 

They invited themselves to the party “If you are verandah then we are 
ash can " 

The fourth time they threw the unwelcome guest downstairs he dusted 
himself off and called, “I know why you throw me out, you don't 
want me up there " 

At the third stop out of St Louis where he was again kicked from the 
vestibule platform, the traveler picked himself up and told an inquirer, 
“It's nothing at all I'm going to Cincinnati if my pants hold out " 

He sat on a hot stove and didn't say a thing except, “Isn't there some- 
thing burning?" 

The joker who threw an egg into the electric fan soon was stood on his 
tin ear 

One audience may wheeze like a calliope with sore tonsils and another 
roar like a burning lumber yard 

Some of them, as you look closer, are slow as molasses in January— or 
quick as greased lightning 

Some are noisy as a cook-stove falling downstairs, and others quiet as an 
eel swimming m oil 

They have met salesmen and politicians low as a baboon's forehead, low 
as a snake's belt-buckle 

Sure as a wild goose never laid a tame egg, they understand a crooked tree 
throws only a crooked shadow 

They have heard of men trying to keep the sea back with a pitchfork 

They have seen cutups funny as a barrel of monkeys turn gloomy as a 
graveyard on a wet Sunday 


536 


  


They have seen one limber as an eelskin finally locked in like a fly m 
amber 

“Sometimes paying on the installment plan is for all the world like pick- 
ing featliers out of molasses ” 

“Crooked as the letter Z, so crooked he could hide behind a corkscrew, 
so crooked he couldn’t fall down a well, so crooked he can’t he 
straight m bed ” 

The poker party ran through Saturday night and Sunday and they came 
out with eyes like burnt holes in an army blanket 

Once m a blue moon something happens so they say it is rare as a snow- 
bird in hell 

There’s nothing to be scared of— unless you’re afraid of a paper tiger 

The woman who’ll kiss and tell is small as the little end of nothing 

In the daily labor of the people 
by and through which life goes on 
the people must laugh or go down 

The slippery roads, icy tools, stalled engines, snowdrifts, hot boxes, cold 
motors, wet matches, mixed signals, time schedules, washouts. 

The punch-clock, the changes from decent foremen to snarling straw 
bosses, the sweltenng July sun, the endless pounding of a blizzard, 
the sore muscles, the sudden backache and the holding on for all the 
backache. 

The quick thinking in wrecks and breakdowns, the fingers and thumbs 
clipped off by machines, the machines that behave no better no 
worse no matter what you call them, the coaxing of a machine and 
fooling with it till all of a sudden she starts and you’re not sure 
why, 

A ladder rang breahng and a legbone or armbone with it, layoffs and no 
paycheck coming, the red diphthena card on the front door, the 
price for a child’s burial casket, hearse and cemetery lot. 

The downrun from butter to oleo to lard to sorghum, the gas meter on 
the blink, the phone taken out, the bills and again bills, for each ten 
dollars due ten cents to pay with or nothing to pay with only debts 
and debts. 

The human sardines of the rush hour car and bus, the gnawing fear of 
defeat till a workman never before licked says now-I’m-licked, the 
boy who says to-hell-with-work-you-never-got-anywhere-worbng-and- 
I’m-going-to-be-a-bum-good-by, the girl who doesn’t know which way 
to go and has a wild look about it. 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


537 


The pleasant surprises of changing weather when the saying passes it’s-a- 
nice-day-isn^t-it and they-can^t-take-this-away-from-us, the shine of 
spring sunlight on a new planted onion patch after bright rain, the 
slow learning of what makes a good workman and the comfort of 
handling good tools, the joy of working with the right kind of a 
crew and a foreman who is ^'one of us,"' a foreman who understands, 
The lurking treachery of machinery, good printers cursing *"the innate 
cussedness of inanimate things,” the pouring of molten ore at the 
right nick and the timing of the clutch of a crane or a lifting derrick 
or the dump of a steam shovel or the toss of a hawser from boatdeck 
to dockpost or the slowing to a stop for a red light or the eye on the 
clock for the deadline of a job marked rush. 

The grades and lines of workmen, how one takes care and puts the job 
through with the least number of motions and another is careless and 
never sure what he is doing and another is careful and means well but 
the gang knows he belongs somewhere else and another is a slouch 
for work but they are glad to have him for his jokes and clowning 

The people laugh, yes, the people laugh 
They have to m order to live and survive under lying politicians, lying 
labor skates, lying racketeers of business, lying newspapers, lying ads 
The people laugh even at lies that cost them toil and bloody exactions 
For a long time the people may laugh, until a day when the laughter 
changes key and tone and has something it didn’t have 
Then there is a scurrying and a noise of discussion and an asking of the 
question what is it the people want 

Then there is the pretense of giving the people what they want, with 
jokers, trick clauses, delays and continuances, with lawyers and fixers, 
playboys and ventriloquists, bigtime promises 
Time goes by and the gams are small for the years go slow, the people go 
slow, yet the gains can be counted and the laughter of the people 
foretokening revolt carries fear to those who wonder how far it will go 
and where to block it 


63 

In a winter sunset near Springfield, Illinois 
In the coming on of a winter gloaming, 

A Negro miner with headlamp and dinner bucket, 
A black man explained how it happens 
In some of the mines only white men are hired. 
Only white men can dig out the coal 


538 


  


Yet he would strike if the strike was right 
And, 'Tor a just cause Td live m the fields 
on hard corn"' 

White man “You take the crow and Til take 
the turkey or Til take the turkey and you 
take the crow ” 

Indian “You don't talk turkey to me once " 

In a corn-belt village after a Sunday game 
a fan said to a farmhand second baseman 
“You play great ball, boy, a little more time 
for practice and you could make the big 
leagues " 

“Sure, I know it, shoveling cow manure, that's 
all that holds me back " 


64 

No matter how thick or how thin you slice it it’s still baloney 

I would if I could and I could if I would but if I couldn’t how could I, 
could you? 

I never made a mistake m grammar but once in my life and as soon as 
I done it I seen it 

He was a good shoveler but I don’t know as I would say he was a fancy 
shoveler 

“You’re always talking about liberty, do you want liberty?” “I don’t know 
as I do and I don’t know as I do ” 

“The tram is running easier now ” “Yes, we’re off the track now ” 

The chorus goes, “They take him by the hand, and they lead him to the 
land, and the farmer is the man who feeds them all ” 

“I hear a burglar in the house ” “Wait, if he finds anything worth steal- 
ing we’ll take it away from him ” 

“Did you say the sky is the hmit?” “Yes, we won’t go any higher than 
the sky ” 

“That dwarf ain’t worth ten cents to see— he’s five feet high if he’s a 
foot ” “Exactly, my good sir, he’s the tallest dwarf in the world ” 

The sea rolls easy and smooth 
Or the sea roars and goes wild 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


539 


The smell of clams and fish comes 
out of the sea 

The sea is nothing to look at 

unless you want to know something 
unless you want to know 
where you came from 

The more things change the more they are the same. 
The worse things are the better they are 
Things will not get better till they've been worse 
When everyone is wrong then everyone is right 
Everybody was wrong and nobody was to blame 

The windjammer drew into harbor after a long cruise 
and they gathered around the captain for a good-by 
and they understood exactly what he meant 
and it seemed like old times to hear him roar 
'Tou can all go to hell 
and Fm damned glad to be rid of you " 
Why did they cheer him unless he was one of them^ 

The Mexicans give a toast 

salud pesetas tiempo para gastarse son, 

health, money, time, what are they for but spending? 

The hoary English folk saying, ''He'd skin a 
louse and send the hide to market," is sur- 
passed in gayety by the antique Persian 
proverb, "He snatches away a flea's hat," 
meaning his calculations are very small, 
indeed, indeed He could sit down and 
figure out how it might be possible to 
sneak up on a flea, snatch off its hat, and 
then by a circuitous route reach a market 
place where he would deliver the hat in 
exchange for what it might bring from 
someone who had a pet flea suffering 
for the want of a hat or from someone 
collecting flea hats who wished to add 
this particular specimen 


540 


  


Who do you think you are 

and where do you think you came from^ 

From toenails to the hair of your head you are 
mixed of the earth, of the air, 

^Of compounds equal to the burning gold and ame- 
thyst lights of the Mountains of the Blood of 
Christ at Santa Fe 

Listen to the laboratory man tell what you are 
made of, man, listen while he takes you apart 
Weighing 150 pounds you hold 3,500 cubic feet of 
gas—oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen 
From the 22 pounds and 10 ounces of carbon m 
you is the filling for 9,000 lead pencils 
In your blood are 50 grains of iron and in the rest 
of your frame enough iron to make a spike 
that would hold your weight 
From your 50 ounces of phosphorus could be made 
800,000 matches and elsewhere m your physical 
premises are hidden 60 lumps of sugar, 20 tea- 
spoons of salt, 38 quarts of water, two ounces 
of lime, and scatterings of starch, chloride of 
potash, magnesium, sulphur, hydrochloric acid 
You are a walking drug store and also a cosmos and 
a phantasmagoria treading a lonesome valley, 
one of the people, one of the minions and 
myrmidons who would like an answer to the 
question, “Who and what are you^'' 

One of the people seeing sun, fog, zero weather, 
seeing fire, flood, famine, having meditations 
On fish, birds, leaves, seeds, 

Skins and shells emptied of living form. 

The beautiful legs of Kentucky thoroughbreds 
And the patience of army mules 

The sea holds colors in its own way 
below 55 fathoms no black, 
below 300 fathoms no red, violet, white, gray, 
below 600 fathoms no purple, green, orange 
“yellow and brown occur at all depths 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


541 


What have you above the ears? 

Or are you dead from the neck up? 

If you don't look out for yourself nobody else will 
What counts most is what you got under your own hat 
Your best friend is yourself 

Every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost 
Fm the only one of my friends I can count on 
Fm not in business for my health 
Fm a lone wolf, I work by myself 
Fm for me, myself and company 
Who said you could work this side of the street? 

God loves the thief but he also loves the owner 
The big thieves hang the little thieves 
Set a thief to catch a thief 
Office without pay makes thieves 
The carpenters have sinned and the tailors are hanged. 

He must have killed a few to get what he's got 

They'll sell you anything, even the blue sky 

Have you seen one man selling the ocean to another? 

A farmer between two lawyers is a fish between two cats 

The rich own the land and the poor own the water 

The rich get richer and the poor get children 

The rich have baby napkins, the poor have diapers 

The big houses have small families and the small houses big families 

Why did Death take the poor man's cow and the rich man's child? 

6 5 

The mazuma, the ]ack, the shekels, the kale. 

The velvet, the you-know-what. 

The what-it-takes, a roll, a wad. 

Bring it home, boy 
Bring home the bacon 
Start on a shoestring if you have to 
Then get your first million 
The second million is always easier than the first 


  


S42 

And if you get more of them round iron men than you 
can use you can always throw them at the birds 
it's been done 

Now take some men, everything they touch turns into money they know 
how the land lays they can smell where the dollars grow 

Money withers if you don't know how to nurse it along money flies away 
if you don't know where to put it 

The first question is, Where do we raise the money, where is the cash 
coming from^ 

A little horse sense helps an idea and horse sense 
take you far if you got a scheme ask yourself, 

Will it work^ 

And let me put one bug m your ear inside information helps how many 
fortunes came from a tip, from being on the ground first, from hear- 
ing a piece of news, from fast riding, early buying, quick selling, or 
plain dumb luck? 

Yes, get Lady Luck with you and you're made some fortunes were tum- 
bled into and the tumblers at first said, Who would have believed it? 
and later, I knew just how to do it 

Yes, Lady Luck counts before you're born pick the right papa and mama 
and the newsreel boys will be on the premises early for a shot of you 
with your big toe m your mouth 

Money is power so said one 
Money is a cushion so said another 
Money is the root of evil so said 
still another 

Money means freedom so runs an old 
saying 

And money is all of these~and more 
Money pays for whatever you want— if 
you have the money 
Money buys food, clothes, houses, land, 
guns, jewels, men, women, time to be 
lazy and listen to music 
Money buys everything except love, 
personality, freedom, immortality, 
silence, peace 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


543 


Therefore men fight for money 
Therefore men steal, kill, swindle, 
walk as hypocrites and whited 
sepulchers 

Therefore men speak softly carrying 
plans, poisons, weapons, each m the 
design The words of his mouth were 
as butter but war was in his heart 
Therefore nations lay strange holds on 
each other, bombardments open, tanks 
advance, salients are seized, aviators 
walk on air, truckloads of amputated 
arms and legs are hauled away 

Money is power, freedom, a cushion, the 
root of all evil, the sum of bless- 
ings 

'Tell us what is money 
For we are ignorant of money, its ways and 
meanings. 

Each a child in a dark storm where people 
cry for money '' 

Where the carcass is the buzzards gather 
Where the treasure is the heart is also 
Money breeds money 
Money runs the world 
Money talk is bigger than talk talk 
No ear is deaf to the song that gold sings 
Money is welcome even when it stinks 
Money is the smew of love and of war 
Money breaks men and rums women 
Money is a great comfort 
Every man has his price 
There are men who can't be bought 
There are women beyond purchase 
When you buy judges someone sells justice 
You can buy anything except day and night 


544 


  


66 

The poobahs rise and hold their poobah sway 
till their use is over 
and other poobahs hitherto unheard of 
step into their shoes and sit at the big tables 
and have their say-so 
till events order the gong for them 
and the fathers can never arrange for the sons 
to be what the fathers were 
in the days that used to be not for long 
both the people and the poobahs— 
life will not let them be 
A little bird flits to the wmdow-sills 
morning by morning 

'Whither goest thou? whither and whither?'" 

They die at noon and midnight, 
they are born in the morning, the afternoon, 
and the river goes on 
and the foamflecks of the river go on 
The same great river carries along 
its foamflecks of poobahs and plain people 
They and their houses go down the river, 
houses built for use or show 
down the crumbling stream they go— 
cabins, frame lumber cottages, installment bungalows, 
mail order residences picked from a catalogue, 
mansions whose windows and gables laughed a nvalry, 
down the same nver they all go 
A few stand, a few last longer than others 
while time and the ram, water and air and time 
have their way, 

morning by morning the little birds on the window-sills 
"Whither goest thou? whither and whither?" 

67 

Was he preaching or wntmg poetry or talking through his hat? He was 
a Chinaman saying, “The fishes though deep in the water may be 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


545 


hooked The birds though high in the air may be shot Man^s heart 
only IS out of reach The heavens may be measured The earth may 
be surveyed The heart of man alone is not to be known '' 

^^Sleep softly, eagle forgotten,” wrote an Illinois poet at the grave of the 
only governor of Illinois sure to be named by remote generations 
'Tou have no rums in America so I thought I would come and visit 
you,” said an English lord to a paralyzed hobo poet in Camden, 
New Jersey 

'The fundamental weakness in every empire and every great civilization 
was the weakness in the character of the upper classes,” ventured a 
Yale professor in a solemn moment 

"When historians of the future tell posterity what the World War was 
about, they will agree upon a cause that nobody who fought it ever 
suspected,” said the chief of the high command of the Allied Armies 

"Bring me my liar,” said a king calling for the historian of the realm 
"History is bunk,” said a history-making motorcar king 
"Words,” added this motorcar king, "are a camouflage for what is going 
on in the mind ” 

"History is a fable agreed upon,” said a shriveled smiling Frenchman 
"Even if you prove it, who cares?” demanded an Illinois state librarian 
"I shall arrange the facts and leave the interpretation to the reader,” said 
the hopeful biographer to the somber historian 
"The moment you begin to arrange you interpret,” emitted the somber 
historian 

"Do you make your newspaper for yourself or the public?” was asked a 
New York founder who replied, *Tor the public, of course” 

"Why isn't your newspaper more intelligent?” was asked a Chicago pub- 
lisher who laughed, ''We make our newspaper for boobs ” 

"Secret influence is the greatest evil of our time,” testified a Harvard presi- 
dent from a birthmarked anxious face 
"And,” added another world-renowned educator, '^the crookedest crooks 
in the United States government have been well educated ” 
"Nevertheless,” quoth an old-fashioned bibulous mayor of Milwaukee, 
"this dying for principle is all rot ” 

"Put a dollar on the shelf thirty days and you have a dollar,” said one 
president of the Pennsylvania railroad "Put a workingman on the 
shelf thirty days and you have a skeleton ” 




  


S46 

“The struggle,” said a delegate from the coal miners, “is between stock- 
holders who do not labor as against laborers who do not hold stock ” 

“The cry of ‘Let us alone,’ ” urged a British commoner, “grows less reso- 
lute, more touched with frenzy ” 

“Thou shalt not steal,” added another commoner, “assumes thou shalt 
not be stolen from ” 

“To cure the depression,” said one adviser early in the depression, “you 
must put the patient on a nch, heavy diet because he is starving for 
nourishment and at the same time you must starve him because he is 
suffering and overstuffed with rich food ” 

“You make nfles,” said an eagle-faced old railroad fireman to ten thousand 
Chicago workingmen at a summer picnic, “you make rifles— and 
you’re always at the wrong end of them ” 

“The mystery of mystenes,” contributed an engineer, “is to watch ma- 
chinery making machinery” 

“Art,” offered an artist, “is something you can’t put into words and when 
you do it isn’t art ” 

“When I am not engaged in thought,” said the possessor of one great 
mind, “I am employed in recovering from its effects ” 

“Millionaires,” said one having two hundred millions, “millionaires who 
laugh are rare ” 

“War requires three things,” urged a short commentator with a long 
head, “first, money, second, money, and third, money” 

“Man,” spoke up an anthropologist, “is a two-legged animal without 
feathers, the only one who cooks his food, uses an alphabet, carries fire- 
arms, dnnks when he is not thirsty, and practices love with an eye 
on birth control” 

“On the one hand an ignorant and arrogant government, and on the other 
hand a gang of ignorant and arrogant hoodlums— so often the voters 
must choose between these two,” said a desperate registered voter in 
Philadelphia as he put a seidel of bock beer under his belt only two 
blocks from Independence Hall and the celebrated crack in the silent 
Liberty Bell 

“For what are we fighting?” inquired a Richmond editor in 1863 “An 
abstraction ” 

“Peace and amity,” said a Georgian in the same year, “is obstructed by 
only two circumstances, the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers, and 
Original Sin ” 

•‘Sometimes,” offered a Concord hermit building a hut for himself, “we 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


547 


class those who are one-and-a-half-witted with the half-witted because 
we appreciate only a third of their wit 
^^Broadway is a street/' typed the colyumist, ^Vhere people spend money 
they haven't earned to buy things they don't need to impress people 
they don't like " 

'Tou ask me what is my theory of the universe/' the physicist replied, 
''when I haven't even a theory of magnetism " 

"The great events of the world," submitted a historian, "take place in the 
brain " 

"In the last analysis," propounded a California wheat novelist, "the people 
are always right— a literature which cannot be vulgarized is not litera- 
ture at all and will perish " 

"The durable culture of any nation," ventured another historian, "rests on 
the mind and genius of its common folk, the masses of the people " 

In a hothouse room where sunlight never came 
hundreds of monster plants winding and twisting 
and by light and volume turned on and off 
you could make them grow fast or slow— 
you could see them trail m snake-vmes, 
explode into mammoth elephant ears 
They crept and reeled in processions 
Of obedient giant clowns and dwarfs, grotesques. 

Symbols of an underworld not yet organized by man, 

Tokens of plenty and hunger in the controls of man 
And the master of these dumb clumsy growths, 

A dwarf and a hunchback, a deep believer 

In the spirit of man mastering material environment, 

Out of Schenectady a wizard loving mankind in peak and abyss, 

Saying science and invention are the enemies of human want 
And the world is organized to abolish poverty 
Whenever the people of the world so will 

Mild and modest were the delegates meeting m 
Basel m 1912 and resolving 
"Let the governments remember they cannot 
unleash a war without danger to themselves " 

Mild and modest were the delegates meeting in 
Geneva in 1934 and resolving 
"Man is still, of all baggage, the most difficult to 


548 


  


transport, and so long as the occupational and 
geographical mobility of labor and the effi- 
ciency of its distribution among different ave- 
nues and places of employment are not im- 
proved at a rate corresponding to accelerated 
technical change, there is reason to expect the 
persistence of a higher volume of technolog- 
ical unemployment '' 

''Listen to me, 
brother 

They'll hand yuh anything 
Look for the dirty work 
Listen 

Never see nothin' 

Never know nothin' 

Never tell nothin' 

Then yuh'll get along 
If they want to frame on yuh, 
they will " 

68 

"The drama of polihcs doesn’t interest me,” said a news rewrite man be- 
neonate beers “It’s only the people running around trying to change 
one gang of bandits for another gang of bandits ” 

“Fve written thousands of words about nothing,” said rewrite number 
two, “and I can do it again ” 

“I don’t know anything,” chimed number three, “and come to think about 
it what I do know ain’t so ” 

“What was it the doughboy wrote home?” a Sunday feature writer chipped 
in “Pershing stood at the tomb of Napoleon and said, ‘LaFollette, 
we are here'’ ” 

“Next,” burbled a city editor, “you’ll be telling about the cub who wired 
from the town on fire, ‘All is confusion can send nothing ’ ” 

“Either that,” he went on, “or the lad whose assignment was to interview 
God and be sure to get a picture ” 

“Or,” not yet being interrupted, “the utilities chief who brushed by Saint 
Peter at the gate of heaven saying, ‘I can’t bother with you, where’s 
God?’ ” 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


549 


''1 want money/' said the editorial writer who knew where he got it, 'hn 
order to buy the time to get the things that money will not buy " 
the utilities/' the Sunday feature writer kicked m again, ''could meter 
the moonlight the lovers would have to pay, pay, and pay " 
love a few individuals," came a droll desk man, "but I've got a grudge 
in general against the human race " 

“Me," came another desk man, "I hate a few individuals and outside of 
that I love the whole damn human family " 

"Hell's bitches," a street man cut in, '‘are poverty, crime, ignorance and 
idleness Disease and insanity are final breakdowns ending long pe- 
riods of anxiety, fear, worry, and unrest " 

"He's reading books, the sonofagun," interrupted the city editor "He's 
going literary on us And how are we going to get out a paper with- 
out poverty and crime?" 

"I found out it takes a smart man to be a crook," said a new lad on the 
police run "And then I got to asking why should a smart man want 
to be a crook? He doesn't have to " 

"The way to be a big shot is don't know too much," a desk man offered 
"What you don't know won't hurt you " 

"Man," said a hitherto silent Sunday feature writer, "is infinitely more 
important than the property he creates We cannot separate the in- 
dividual from the work it produces Property does not exist outside 
and above the men who jointly produce it " 

"He'll be joining the guild soon if he hasn't already got a card," the edi- 
torial writer editorialized "Bend thy neck, proud Sicambnan Adore 
what thou hast burned Burn what thou hast adored " 

"May," a rewrite ended the session, "may the fair goddess. Fortune, fall 
deep in love with thee and prosperity be thy page " 

"If you have nothing to do please don't do it here," said one of the re 
writes opening the next day's session with a tall tankard 
"Nevertheless," rejoined a rewrite, "I can tell you I met a discouraged 
undertaker today saying his business was to bury the dead and it 
looked to him as though the dead have stopped dying " 

"And I," put m a member of the art department, "met an intellectual 
who says to me why don't you draw the pelican and all I could hand 
him was why do I want to draw the pelican since it's all there when 
you look at it and any of the camera boys can do it quicker " 

One camera boy saying, "I have found woman to be the same as man, 
with slight alterations," another burbled, "Thank God for those 
alterations " 


550 


  


“I don’t see,” put in the new college lad on the police run, “why any man 
wants to kill another If he’ll just wait the other man is going to die 
sometime anyhow ” 

“It’s like men chasing after women,” said a rewrite “If they didn’t the 
women would chase after them ” 

“We ought to have a series of interviews,” offered a desk man, “on 
whether the man chases the woman or whether it’s the woman that 
chases the man, columns and columns with pictures and snappy 
captions ” 

“They put on the wires today,” said a unit from the telegraph desk, “an 
Insh poet saying when he’s going to write a poem he has the same 
feeling a hen has when she’s going to lay an egg ” 

“That’s news,” believed the city editor “News is anything we think ought 
to be printed to gladden our readers’ hearts or throw the fear of God 
into them” 

“We describe the revels of the rich,” interposed a slightly illuminated 
assistant Sunday editor, “so the poor may enjoy in imagination the 
pleasures their purses will not permit them m reality ” 

“Yet I notice,” he went on, “my associates have considerable difficulty on 
various occasions in brightening and rendering readable the dull antics 
of the wives of the big advertisers ” 

“And,” he continued, “if the big advertiser himself gets into difficulties so 
notonous that something must be printed we soften the blow to the 
fullest extent and this is as it should be for advertising is the life blood 
of a newspaper and who are we that we should bite the hand that 
feeds us?” 

“You’re a dirty radical bothered with a streak of the blessed Rotarian,” 
put in a rewnte 

“In Moscow,” interspersed one just back from Russia, “an English liberal 
tells me a bugler every morning steps out in front of the Kremlin and 
blows a long powerful blast and they ask him what for and he says, 
T am sounding the call for the international revolution of the united 
workers of the world who have nothing to lose but their chains and 
a world to gain,’ and they ask him what he gets paid for this daily 
bugle call and he says, ‘Not much— but it’s a permanent job ’ ” 

“For my part,” an editonal writer ended his silence, “I begin each bright 
mommg with praying Lord, give me this day my daily opinion and 
forgive me the one I had yesterday ” 

“And I,” rejoined the slightly illuminated one, “never quit dreaming of a 
time when every man is his own policeman, priest and editonal 
writer ” 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


551 

“You would wish yourself,” the editonal writer had it, “out of your own 
]ob and me out of mine ” 

^'Yes/^ as some of them prepared for the suburban trains, 'bne of these 
days science and invention will have rendered each one of us humble 
servants of the public a superfluous and unnecessary unit of labor and 
all we 11 have to worry about is how to occupy our very valuable 
minds when there is nothing to do but nothing ” 

The city editor managed to have the final words 

'Til take vanilla* horsefeathers*” 


69 

"A lawyer/' hiccuped a disbarred member of the bar^ “is a man who 
gets two other men to take off their clothes and then he runs away 
with them " 

“If the law IS against you, talk about the evidence/' said a battered bar- 
rister 'Tf the evidence is against you, talk about the law, and, since 
you ask me, if the law and the evidence are both against you, then 
pound on the table and yell like hell " 

“The law," said the Acme Sucker Rod manufacturer who was an early 
Christian mayor of Toledo, Ohio, “the law is what the people will 
back up " 

“You haven't climbed very high," said a Wall Street operator who was 
quoted m the press, “unless you own a judge or two " 

Lawyer What was the distance between 
the two towns? 

Witness Two miles as the cry flows 

Lawyer You mean as the crow flies 

Judge No, he means as the fly crows 

Between the Whig sheriff and the Demo- 
cratic judge in Boone County, Mis- 
souri, was a breach wide enough to 
erect gallows 

A visiting lawyer handed the judge a brief 
spattered with large goose-quill pen- 
manship 

The judge turned the document crossways 
and upside down scrutinizing it 



552 


  


'"Can't that ]udge of yours read writin'?" 

whispered the lawyer to the sheriff 
"No/' whispered the sheriff "He can't 
read readin', let alone writin' " 

Who was the twentieth century lawyer who said of another lawyer, "He 
has one of the most enlightened minds of the eighteenth century"? 
and why did fate put both of them on the Supreme Court bench? 

The surgeon held his profession the oldest in 
the world through the operation whereby 
Eve was made of rib from Adam 
The engineer held the world was once chaos 
and its reorganization a matchless engineer- 
ing feat 

The politician put in, "Who made that chaos?" 

And the laugh comes m there, a half a 
laugh, and come to think about it, less 
than half a laugh 


70 

The tumblers of the rapids go white, go green, 
go changing over the gray, the brown, the rocks 
The fight of the water, the stones, 
the fight makes a foam laughter 
before the last look over the long slide 
down the spread of a sheen in the straight fall 
Then the growl, the chutter, 
down under the boom and the muffle, 
the hoo hoi deep, 
the hoo hoi down, 

this is Niagara 

The human race m misery snarls. 

The writhing becomes a mob 

The mob is the beginning of something, 

Perhaps the mournful beginning 

Of a march out of darkness 

Into a lesser darkness 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


553 


And so on until 

The domes of smooth shadows 

Space themselves in tall triangles 

And nations exchange oleanders 

Instead of gas, loot and hot cargo 

The mob is a beginning, man lacking concert 

The hanging mob hangs more than its victim 

These seethings are a recoil and a downdrag 

Each debauch costs 

Fevers and rots run a course before growth 

The mob is a beginning, man lacking concert 
What IS an army with banners and guns 
Other than a mob given form and orders to kill? 

And when will the nations exchange oleanders 
Instead of gas, loot and hot cargo? 

A tram of soldiers passes 

The khaki lads cheer, laugh, sing, and the flag goes by 
They are young and the young time is the time to be gay, to sing, laugh, 
cheer, even out of car windows on the way to mine strike duty 
Some of these boys will be laid out stiff and flags will drape their coffins 
Some of the mine strikers will be laid out stiff and flags drape their coffins 
Faraway owners of the mines will read about it in morning papers along- 
side breakfast 


71 

Who was that antique Chinese crook who put over his revolution and 
let out a rooster crow ''Burn all the books’ history must begin 
with us’” 

What burned so inside of him that he must burn all the books? and 
why do we all want to read those books just because he hated 
them so? 

Yet we hand him this He singled out no special lot of books for burn- 
ing he hated books as such and wanted them all up in smoke 

"Let history begin with us,” was his cry and maybe it began and what 
were its chapters and what was his name as its beginner? 

What is history but a few Big Names plus 
People? 


554 


  


What IS a Big Name unless the people love it 
or hate it 

For what it did to them or for them while it 
was in the going^ 

And this Big Name means pretense and plunder, 
ashes and dung. 

While another is armfuls of roses, enshrined 
beyond speech 

You may call spirits from the vasty deep. 

Aye, you may— but will they come 
When you call them? 

You may sell an idea to the people 

And sit back satisfied you have them your way 

But will they stay sold on the idea? 

Will they be easy to hold in line 
Unless the idea has a promise of roots 
Twisted deep in the heart of man 
Being brought into play 
As though justice between man and man 
May yet breeze across the world with sea-smells 
And a very old, a very plain homemade cry, 
'Why didn't we think of this before?" 

In the intimate circles of the dictator. 

At the desk at the end of a long room 
where the imitation of God Almighty 
sits running the works. 

In the speech and look of the main star 
and the lesser stars hovenng m a 
cluster and an orbit. 

They know m the pressure of their personal 
ego that this too shall pass away and be 
lost in the long mass shadow of the ever- 
living people 

And down under the taboos and emblems, be- 
hind pomp and ntual, posture and strut, 
if the word justice is only one more word, 
if the talk about justice is merely window- 
dressing, if liberty is pushed too far in the 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


555 


name of discipline, if the delicate lines 
between personal freedom and requisite so- 
cial performance are not every moment 
a terrible load of care 

There will be a payday and little bells lost in 
the clang and boom of big bells 

People are what they are 
because they have come out of what was 
Therefore they should bow down before what was 
and take it and say it’s good— or should they^ 

The advocates and exemplars of pride and gluttony 
are forgotten or recalled with loathing 
The mouthpieces of dumb misery are remembered 
for the bitter silences they broke with crying 
'Took, see this^ 
if it is alive or only half-alive 
what name does it go by, 
why is it what it is 
and how long shall it be^'' 

Who can fight against the future^ 

What is the decree of tomorrow^ 

Haven't the people gone on and on 
always taking more of their own? 

How can the orders of the day 

be against the people in this time^ 
What can stop them from taking 
more and more of their own? 


72 

What is a judged A judge is a seated torso and head sworn before God 
never to sell justice nor play favorites while he umpires the disputes 
brought before him 

When you take the cigar out of your face and the fedora off your head m 
the presence of the court, you do it because it is required from those 
who are supposed to know they have come into a room where burns 
the white light of that priceless abstraction named justice 



556 


  


What IS a judged The perfect judge is austere, impersonal, impartial, mark- 
ing the line of right or wrong by a hairsbreadth 
Before him, bow humbly, bow low, be a pilgrim, light a candle 
For he is a rara avis, a rare bird, a white blackbird, a snowwhite crow 

What is a judge? A featherless human biped having bowels, glands, blad- 
ders, and intricate blood vessels of the brain. 

One more frail mortal, one more candle a sudden change of wind might 
blow out as any common candle blows out in a wind change 
So that never again does he sit in his black robes of solemn import before 
a crowded courtroom saying two-years ten-years twenty-years life for 
you or ''hanged by the neck till you are dead dead dead '' 

What IS a judge? One may be the owner of himself coming to his deci- 
sions often in a blur of hesitations knowing by what snarled courses 
and ropes of reason justice operates, with reservations, in twilight 
zones 

What IS a judge? Another owns no more than the little finger of himself, 
others owning him, others having placed him where he is, others tell- 
ing him what they want and getting it, others referring to him as "our 
judge'' as though he is measured and weighed beforehand the same as 
a stockyards hog, others holding him to decisions evasive of right or 
wrong, others writing his decisions for him, the atmosphere hushed 
and guarded, the atmosphere having a faint stockyards perfume 
What IS a judge? Sometimes a mind giving one side the decision and the 
other side a lot of language and sympathy, sometimes washing his 
hands and rolling a pair of bones and leaving equity to a pair of gal- 
loping ivories 

What is a judge? A man picked for a job by politicians with an eye some- 
times on justice for the public, equal rights to all persons entering— 
or again with an eye on lucrative favors and special accommoda- 
tions— a man having bowels, glands, bladders, and intricate blood ves- 
sels of the brain 

Take that cigar out of your face Take that hat off your head 
And why? why? Because here we are sworn never to sell justice and here 
burns the white light of that priceless abstraction named justice 

What is a judge? 

He is a man 

Yes, after all, and no matter what, 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


557 


and beyond all procedures and investitures, 
a judge IS nothing more nor less than a man- 
one man having his one-man path, his one- 
man circle and orbit among other men 
each of whom is one man 
Therefore should any judge open his mouth 
and speak as though his words have an 
added light and weight beyond the speech 
of one man? 

Of what IS he the mouthpiece when he speaks? 

Of any ideas or passions other than those gath- 
ered and met in the mesh of his own per- 
sonality? Can his words be measured forth 
in so special a realm of exact justice in- 
structed by tradition, that they do not re- 
late to the living transitory blood of his 
vitals and brain, the blood so soon to cool 
in evidence of his mortal kinship with all 
other men? 

73 

In the light of the cold glimmer of what everybody knows, why should the 
owners of the judges speak of respect for the law and the sanctity of 
the Constitution when they know so well how justice has been taken 
for a ride and thrown gagged and beaten into a ditch? 

Why IS it now a saying of the people, “You can’t convict a million dol- 
lars”? 

Why IS the bribe-taker convicted so often and the bnbe-giver so seldom? 

Why does a hoary proverb live on its allegation that the nets of the law 
gather the petty thieves and let the big ones get away? what does this 
mean in the homes of the poor? how does it connect with cnme and 
the poor? 

Why should the propertyless depositors of wrecked banks be saying, 
“Wreck a bank from the outside and you get twenty years, wreck it 
from the inside and all you have to do is start another bank”? 

What do the people say in their homes, in their churches, in their gather 
ing places over coffee-and-doughnuts beer-and-pretzels? and how does 
the talk run about millionaire robbers, malefactors of great wealth, 
sitting easy with their loot while 



558 


  


One-two-three, five-six-seven every day the police seize and the courts order 
to jail 

this skulker who stole a bottle of milk, 
this shadow who ran off with a loaf of bread, 
this wanderer who purloined a baby sweater 
in a basement salesroom— 

And the case is dismissed of the railroad yard plain-clothes detective who 
repeatedly called ''Stop^'' to a boy running with a sack of coal and 
the boy not stopping the dick let him have it ''It was dark and I 
couldn't see him clear and I aimed at his legs My intention was to 
stop him running I didn't mean for the bullet to go as high on him 
as it did " 

Thieves? Yes Little thieves? Yes And they get it where the chicken gets 
the ax? Yes And the big shots are something else? Yes And you can't 
convict a million dollars? Not unless Tuesday is Saturday, neighbor 

What is a jury? Twelve men picked by chance and a couple of lawyers, 
twelve men good and true or not-so-good, six of one and a half dozen 
of the other 

A jury? A bundle of twelve fagots, a dozen human sticks light and dark 
with loves and hates, Protestant, Catholic, Jew, free-thinker, merchant, 
farmer, workingman, thief, wets and drys, union and scab, savers and 
spenders, tightwads and crapshooters, locked in a room to come out 
saying Yes in one voice, No m one voice, or else, "Don't ask us what 
is justice, we agree to disagree," all in one voice 

A jury? Twelve names out of a hat Twelve picked blindfolded from a city 
directory or a polling list The next twelve crossing Mam Street, two 
blocks from the post office Odd Fellows, Masons, Knights of Colum- 
bus, deacons, poker-players. Democrats, Republicans, Independents, 
Ku Klux and Anti-Ku Klux, ball fans, chippie chasers, teetotalers, con- 
verts and backsliders 

Now you got a jury Add one judge Add a few lawyers Add newspapers, 
town gossip, "what everybody says " Add witnesses and evidence Add 
it all The jury verdict is guilty not-guilty or agree-to-disagree 

"Do you solemnly swear before the ever- 
living God that the testimony you 
are about to give m this cause shall 
be the truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth?" 




THE PEOPLE, YES 


559 


"'No, I don't I can tell you what I saw 
and what I heard and Fll swear to 
that by the everlivmg God but the 
more I study about it the more sure 
I am that nobody but the everlivmg 
God knows the whole truth and if 
you summoned Christ as a witness in 
this case what He would tell you 
would burn your insides with the 
pity and the mystery of it " 

74 

What other oaths are wanted now? 

You can never make moon poems 
for people who never see the moon 
Your moon poems are aimed 
at people who look at the moon 
and say, “Hello moon, good old moon, 

“I knew you wouldn’t forget me, 

“Throw me a kiss, moon, 

“I’ll be seeing you, moon ” 

And the sun? what of the sun? 

Can you make a sun poem 
For those having soot on the window-sill? 
When smoke and smudge and building walls 
Stand between them and the sun 
How can they get to know the sun 
And how would they know a sun poem if they 
Met one coming straight at them? 

What use for them to hold a hand up against 
the sun for the sake of seeing a silhouette 
of the blue frame of the handbones? 

In the slums overshadowed by smokestacks. 
In the tomato cans in the window-sills 
The geraniums have a low weeping song, 
“Not yet have we known the sun, 
not yet have we known the sun,” 
Modulated with a hoping song, 

“Some day we shall meet the sun 


560 


  


''And gather pieces of the sun into ourselves 
"And be no longer stunted, 
no longer runts of the slums ” 

And babies^ what of the babies? 

Can you make baby poems 
For those who love special babies 
clean antiseptic babies? 
what of those Red Indian babies 
fresh from the birthing-crotch? 

For each of them the mystery-man raised 
his right hand toward the sky and called 
"Hey you sun moon stars 

and you winds clouds ram mist, 
"Listen to me^ listen! 

"The news is another baby belonging 

has come to this earth of ours 
"Make its path smooth so it can reach 
the top of the first hill 
and the second hill 

"And hey you valleys rivers lakes trees grasses 
you make its path smooth so it can reach 
the top of the third hill 
"And listen you birds of the air, 
you animals of the tall timbers, 
you bugs and creepers, 
you too listen^ 

"All you of sky earth and air, I ask you, beg you 
"Pass this baby on till it climbs up over 
and beyond the fourth hill 
"From then on this child will be strong enough 
"To travel on its own and see what is beyond 
those four hills^^' 


75 

Hxinger and only hunger changes worlds^ 

The dictate of the belly 

that gnawing under the navel, 

this alone is the builder and the pathfinder 

sending man into danger and fire 

and death by struggle? 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


561 


Yes and no, no and yes 
The strong win against the weak 
The strong lose against the stronger 
And across the bitter years and the howling winters 
the deathless dream will be the stronger, 
the dream of equity will win 
There are shadows and bones shot with lights 
too strong to be lost 
Can the wilderness be put behind^ 

Shall man always go on dog-eat-dog? 

Who says so? 

The stronger? 

And who is the stronger? 

And how long shall the stronger hold on 
as the stronger? 

What will tomorrow write? 

''Of the people by the people for the people?'' 

What mockers ever wrung a crop from a waiting soil 
Or when did cold logic bring forth a child? 

"What use is it?" they asked a kite-flymg sky gazer 
And he wished in return to know, "What use is a baby?" 

The dreaming scholars who quested the useless, 
who wanted to know merely for the sake of knowing, 
they sought and harnessed electrodynamic volts 
becoming in time thirty billion horses m one country 
hauling with thirty-billion-horse-power 
and this is an early glimpse, a dim beginning, 
the first hill of a series of hills. 

What comes after the spectrum? 

With what will the test-tubes be shaken tomorrow? 

For what will the acetylene torch and pneumatic chisel be scrapped? 
What will the international partnerships of the world laboratories track 
down next, what new fuels, amalgams, alloys, seeds, cross-breeds, un- 
foreseen short cuts to power? 

Whose guess is better than anybody else's on whether the breed 

of fire-brmgers is run out, whether light rays, death rays, laugh rays, 
are now for us only m a dim beginning? 

Across the bitter years and the howling winters 
the deathless dream will be the stronger 
the dream of equity will win 


562 


  


76 

The record is a scroll of many indecipherable scrawls, 
telling the pay of the people for commencing acbon 
toward redress of wrongs too heavy 
to be longer borne 

"No strike is ever lost” an old crv 
heard before the stake begins and heard long after, and 
“No stake is ever lost” either a thought or an instinct 
equivalent to “Give me liberty or give me death ” 

On the honzon a cloud no larger than 
a man’s hand rolls larger and darker when masses of people 
begin saying, “Any kind of death is better than this bnd 
of life” 


The machine world of the insects 
individual spiders engineenng exploits 
interwoven colonies of bees and ants 
clouds of grasshopper destroyers 
— they carry lessons and warnings 
they do what they must 
they are beyond argument 

The flowing of the stream clears it of pollution 

The refuse of humanity, the offscourings, the encumbenngs. 

They are who? 

They are those who have forgotten work and the pnce 
At which life goes on 

They live in shambles overly foul and in mansions overly 
Swept and garnished 

The flowing of the stream clears it of pollution 

77 

The bottom of the sea accommodates mountain ranges 

This IS how deep the sea is 

And the toss and drip of the mystery of the people 

And the sting of sea-drip 

In the long catacombs of moss fish linger and move 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


563 


Hearing the cries of dolphins while they too wander 
This IS the depot of lost and unreclaimed baggage, 
Colosseums of dead men^s bones and the trunks of the 
dead men each with a lock of hair, a ringlet of 
somebody’s hair in a locket, and a pack of love 
letters and a deck of cards and a testament and 
leather straps and brass buckles and brass locks 
holding their fasteners on the trunks 


78 

What did Hiamovi, the red man. Chief of 
the Cheyennes, have^ 

To a great chief at Washington and to a 
chief of peoples across the waters, 

Hiamovi spoke 

'There are birds of many colors— red, blue, 
green, yellow. 

Yet it IS all one bird 

There are horses of many colors— brown, 
black, yellow, white, 

Yet It IS all one horse 
So cattle, so all living things, animals, 
flowers, trees 

So men in this land, where once were only 
Indians, are now men of many colors- 
white, black, yellow, red 
Yet all one people 

That this should come to pass was m the 
heart of the Great Mystery 
It IS right thus— and everywhere there 
shall be peace ” 

Thus Hiamovi, out of a tarnished and weather- 
worn heart of old gold, out of a living 
dawn gold 

What IS the float of life that goes by us 

in certain moods of autumn smoke 

when tall trees seem in the possession of phantoms 

carrying a scheme of haze 


564 


  


inevitably past changing sunsets 
into a moist moonlight 
and beyond into a baffling moonset 
on a mist horizon^ 

These devices are made of whsit color and air^ 

And how far and in how does man make them himself^ 

What is this pool of reverie 

this blur of contemplation 

wherein man is brother to mud and gold 

to bug and bird 

to behemoths and constellations^ 

In the evening twilight in the skyscraper office 
and the hoom hoom of a big steamboat docking 
and the auto horns and the corner newsboys 
only half heard as far up as sixteen floors 

the doctor meditated and spoke 'The rich come afraid to die, afraid 
to have their throats looked into, their intestines prodded It hurts 
Their power of resistance is gone Thev can't stand pain Things go 
wrong, they come into my office and ask what is the matter I have 
to be careful how I say, 'You are growing old, that is all, everybody 
grows old, we all have to die ' That scares them They don't want to 
grow old They tell me I must find a way to keep them from growing 
old They don't want to die They tell me they will pay me to find 
a way so they won't have to die " Thus m the evening twilight, in 
the hoom hoom and the auto horns and the corner newsboys only 
half heard up sixteen floors 
And he went on 

"I was m a hospital the other day A man blind thirty-five years could see 
again We walked out together And up the street he saw a horse 
He asked, 'What is that^' I said, 'It's a horse— didn't you ever see a 
horse before^' He answered, 'No, this is the first time I ever saw a 
horse ' " 

Thus in the evening twilight 
m the hoom hoom 

And the doctor went on "A few weeks ago came a woman saying she 
had been to a great symphony concert, going out to walk miles, still 
hearing the grand crashes of that music, walking home on air, telling 
me, 'I went to bed and wept for three weeks— what is the matter 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


565 


With I had to tell her, 'Only a slight matter You will be well 
again when you learn to listen to the ticking of the clock ' 

To a lawyer who came saying he had undertaken more financial reorgani 
zations than there was time for and his nerves were shot the doctor 
talked long about worry, gave the lawyer a box and 100 black beans 
"Each morning you drop a bean in the box and say, Worry is in the 
bean and the bean is in the box ' '' 

In the hoom hoom of the big steamboat docking the doctor said, "Silence 
IS the great gratitude when bad music ends ” 


79 

In paper sacks the customers carry away millions of tons of goods daily 
except Sunday 

And having used what they carry away in paper sacks they go back daily 
except Sunday for more millions of tons of useable goods transferred 
in paper sacks 

And the trade experts look on and call it consumption while the people 
carrying the paper sacks have a way of alleging, "We have to eat, 
don't we?" 

And once there was a man who considered how he might make 
a paper sack song and invent a paper sack dance In the days 
of his youth he had worked in the pulp Joined with other 
men and machines he had taken logs and cooked a mash 
and dried and flattened it out and kept flattening it till it 
was thin as paper and it was paper And his sister in another 
mill had watched a machine and tended it, daily except Sun- 
day it spat forth its stmt of millions of paper sacks 

And the brother and sister say to each other now, 'We have made so many 
millions of paper sacks we know exactly the feelings and ideas of any 
one paper sack One paper sack thinks just what another paper sack 
thinks And now when our jobs are gone because bigger and better 
machines do what we used to do my sister and I say to each other 
Hello, old paper sack And we talk about how we are a couple of 
paper sacks thrown away and no longer wanted because there is no 
answer to the question Why are paper sacks so cheap? 

"And we talk on and we decide we are something more than 
paper sacks We have a right to live and a right to work and 
we have a right to say life ought to be good and life is more 
than paper sacks And we will go anywhere and listen to any 


$66 


  


organizers and agitators who come to us saying We speak 
to you as people and not as paper sacks ” 

In Gloversville, New York, a woman daylong made mittens and the faster 
she made the mittens the more the wages coming in for her and her 
children 

And her hands became like mittens she said, 

And in the wintei when she looked out one night 
Where the moon lighted a couple of evergreen trees 
“My God' I look at evergreens m the moonlight 
and what are they? A pair of mittens 
And what am I myself? Just a mitten 
Only one more mitten, that’s all 

My God' if I live a little longer in that mitten factory the whole world 
will he ]ust a lot of mittens to me 

And at last I will be buried in a mitten and on my grave they will put up 
a mitten as a sign one more mitten is gone ” 

This was why she listened to the organizer of the glove and mitten work- 
ers’ union, maybe the union could do something 
She would fight in the union ranks and see if somehow they could save 
her from seeing two evergreens at night in the moon as ]ust another 
pair of mitts 


80 

Deep in the dusty chattels of the tombs. 

Laden with luggage handed them 

By departing ghosts saying, “It’s yours, all yours,” 

They give their ghost impnnt to the time they live in 
They are to the people what they are to the sea. 

To the harvest moon, to the living grassroots. 

To the tides that wash them away babbling to some caretaker, “What 
fame IS it? where are we?” 

And time, since you ask, time is the story-teller you can’t shut up, he goes 
on 

The king, like many a fang, was a little coocoo, and hung up a challenge 
Whoever would tell him a story so long that he couldn’t stand any 
more of it would marry his pnncess daughter Otherwise the story- 
teller’s neck would be blemished with a gleaming ax-blade The story- 
teller began on how gram elevators bulging with com ran for miles 
while the locusts spread out many more miles and there was only 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


567 


one point of entry and egress for the crawling hordes of slithering 
locusts, only one place for a locust to go in and out And one locust 
went in and brought out a gram of com and another locust went in 
and brought out another gram of corn And another locust went in 
and brought out another gram of corn And another locust went in 
and brought out another gram of corn And so on and so on till the 
king saw what he had let himself m for and speaking m the royal tone 
customary to kings he told the story-teller, 'Tou win, the girl is yours 
And this was back in the old days when kings were kings and wore 
crowns and had crown jewels 

Time^ The story-teller you can't shut up, he goes on 

'Time IS blind, man stupid" 

Thus one of the cynics 
"Time IS relentless, man shrewd " 

Thus one of the hopefuls 

Time passes, man laughs at it 
The sun-dial was one laugh 
The wrist-watch is another 
"Time^ I can't stop it but I 
can measure it " 

8 1 

Chicago seems all fox and swine, 

Dreams interfused with smut, dung, hunger 
Yet Chicago is not all belly and mouth and 
overwrought sex and lies and greed 
and snobs 

Chicago has something over and beyond 
Sometime the seeds and cross-fertilizations 
now moving in Chicago may inaugurate 
a crossroads of great gladness 
The same goes for Omaha and points west, 
for Buffalo and points east 

Out of the shopping crowds at State and Madison, hot with bundles and 
bargains, 

A humpty-dumpty runt of a man dived at high noon into a forest of rub- 
bernecks craning at a skywriting plane telling you what cigarette to 
smoke next, what cigarette to buy. 



568 


  


And he came up to say there was too much quick thinking and he would 
offer a little slow thinking 

“From the museum mummies I came to these ghosts swirling around State 
and Madison, Forty-second and Fifth Avenue, and about all I learned 
was this, you can write it on a thumbnail 

“There is a dead past and a blank future and the same humanity is in 
each and it’s all ham and eggs, dog eat dog, the toughest guts have 
their way, and they kill and kill to see who’ll get the most marbles, 
the most cocoanuts, the most little embossed pieces of paper ” 

And then he went on, wiping his chin with four fingers and a thumb, 
screwing his eyes to a thin slit, and correcting himself 

“I take that back Write it off as a loss If the big arch of the sky were 
paper and the violet depths of the sea were ink, I could never live 
long enough to write the dreams of man and the dynamic dnve of 
those dreams 

“Who and what is man? He is Atlas and Thor and Yankee Doodle, an 
eagle, a lion, a rooster, a bear that walks like a man, an elephant, a 
moon-face, David and Goliath, Paul Bunyan and the Flying Dutch- 
man, Shakespeare, Lincoln and Christ, tlie Equator and the Arctic 
Poles, holding in one hand the Bank of England and the Roman 
Catholic Church, in the other the Red Army and the Standard Oil 
Company, holding m easy reach the dogs of war and the doves of 
peace, the tigers of wrath and the horses of instruction 

“Let me sell you my dreams Take these dreams for whatever you want to 
pay me You shall never be tired till the sea is tired You shall never 
go weary till the land and the wind go weary You will be hard as nails, 
soft as blue fog 

“Man IS bom with rainbows in his heart and you’ll never read him unless 
you consider rainbows He is a trouble shooter with big promises He 
trades the Oklahoma roan mustang for a tub in the sky with wings 
falling falling in Alaska Hard as a rock his head is an egg and pon- 
ders ponders He is a phantasmagoria of cnmson dawns and what it 
takes to build his dreams.” 

So the finish He ceased from wiping his chin with four fingers and a 
thumb, ceased from screwing his eyes to a thin slit, ceased correcting 
himself. 

Then he vanished In a wreath of blue smoke from a panatella seegar he 
was gone, a scholar, a clown, and a dreambook seller who had said 
enough for one day 

Turning a comer he talked to himself about the dust of the knuckles of 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


569 


his great-grandfathers, how they once were hard as nails and could 
pick a vest-button with a bullet, and how his own little knuckles 
sometime would shiver into fine dust and how he wanted snowdrifts 
piled over him and the inscription here no one lies buried 


82 

I PLEDGE my allegiance, 

say the munitions makers and the international bankers, 
I pledge my allegiance to this flag, that flag, 
any flag at all, of any country anywhere 
paying its bills and meeting interest on loans, 
one and indivisible, 

coming through with cash in payment as stipulated 
with liberty and justice for all, 

say the munitions makers and the international bankers 

'Tour million dollars, if you will pardon me,"' 
said a polite shnmp, "came one of three 
ways First, if you will pardon me, you 
took it somehow as profits within the law 
belonging to you, unless, second, you have 
it as a gift or bequest handed to you with- 
out your working for it, or unless, if you 
will pardon me, third and last, you took 
it, outside the law and yet beyond the 
reach of the law, as belonging to you 
rather than whoever had it before vou 
got it from them ” 

What good IS ram on a hard and sour soil? 

Why put a driller and seeder 
where the top soil is blown away^ 

Why put your headlights on in bright noon? 

Why do favors where you know you get no thanks? 

Some have their finger-nails pinked 
a regular shade, according to custom 
Some, wearing pearls, have their finger-nails 
tinted, enameled and polished 


570 


  


to match the precise color of their pearls 
Those with oyster pearls shade to a crystal, 
others are touched with desert gray, sea green 
And cosmetics volume last year was over a billion 


83 

Who can make a poem of the depths of weariness 
bringing meaning to those never in the depths^ 

Those who order what they please 
when they choose to have it— 
can they understand the many down under 
who come home to their wives and children at night 
and night after night as yet too brave and unbroken 
to say, '1 ache all over''^ 

How can a poem deal with production cost 
and leave out definite misery paying 
a permanent price in shattered health and early old age^ 

When will the efficiency engineers and the poets 
get together on a program^ 

Will that be a cold day^ will that be a special hour? 

Will somebody be coocoo then? 

And if so, who? 

And what does the Christian Bible say? 

And the Mohammedan Koran and Confucius and the Shmtoists 
and the Encyclicals of the Popes? 

Will somebody be coocoo then? 

And if so, who?? 


8 4 

l3sr the chain store or the independent it is the people meeting the people 
''Would you like to be waited on? Could I wait on you? Could I be 
of assistance? Is there something you would like? Is there something 
for you? Could I help you? Anything I can help you to? What will 
yours be? What can I get for you? What would you like? Is there 
something?'' 

The rodeo boss wrangler, the airplane stunter, 
the living cannonball shot from a gun, 
the animal tamer amid paws and fangs— 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


571 


they use up their luck ahead of time, 
they bet their necks and earn a living 
they play fair with their seen galleries 
the same as lone hunters and explorers 
aim to please unseen acres of fine faces, 
aim to tell about it later maybe 
if a public cares to hear 

In this corner the spotlighted challenger, 

in this corner the world's heavyweight champ 

along with camera boys grinding, 

lads at the mikes giving round by round, 

they aim to please, 

to put it over big 

for the fish on the spot, 

for the many more fish beyond, 

one sports writer quizzing another, 

"'How many of the fish are here^ 

''What's your guess^" 

The world series pitcher pets his arm, 

prays he won't get a glass arm 

he too strives to please 

he would like to put smoke on the ball 

and throw a hitless game 

when the big>boy home-mn hitter 

has an off day and fans the air, 

at the umpire's cry "three strikes" 

he may hear from the bleachers, 

"Take the big bum out " 

One movie star arches her eyebrows 
and refers to "my public " 

One soda-jerker arches his eyebrows, 
curves malt-milk from shaker to glass 
and speaks of "my public " 

The dance marathon winning couple 
bow sleepy thanks to their public 
The fire department ladder truck driver 
sees his public at a standstill 
on the sidewalk curbs. 


572 


  


The going-going-gone jewelry auctioneer 
plays to another public 
And at every street intersection 
these publics intersect 

Ringmasters in top hats, clowns on mules, 
circus riders in spangles, 
little ladies doing somersaults on horses, 
acrobat families in pink tights 
sliding their own human toboggans— 
the peanut, popcorn, and red lemonade sellers 
they feel their crowds and read crowd moods 

“I know why I lost my crowd tonight,'' 
said a flame of an actor 
''I never can do anything with them 
unless I love them " 

The breezes of surface change blow lightly 
The people take what comes, hold on, let go 
The high wheel bicycle was a whiz 
Eskimo pie raked in a lot of jack 
The tom thumb golf courses had a run 
Yo yo charmed till yo yo checked out 
The tree sitters climbed up, came down 
Sideburns, galways, handlebar mustaches, full beards, 
they flitted away on winds whistling, 

'Where are the snows of yesteryear^" 
meaning snow and stage-snow, the phony and the real 
gone to the second-hand bins, the rummage sales, 
the Salvation Army wagons 

Stronger winds blow slow 
Trial balloons are sent up 
The public says yes, says no 
The whim of the public rides 
A hoarse cry carves events 

The platoon of police in uniform, 
the drum-major with his baton 
and a gold ball high in the air. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


573 


The silver cornet band, the fife-and-drum corps, 
the Knights of Pythias in plume and gilt braid, 
the speakers of the day with mounted escorts, 
the fire department, the Odd Fellows, the Woodmen, 
the civilian cohorts following the local militia, 
American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars, 
they march between sidewalks 
heavy with a human heave, 
heavy with vox populi 

''Me too, count me in 
I want to belong 
I do what's regular 
ril sign up 

A trial package can t hurt me 
Here's my name and dues 
I'll try anything once " 

This is the tune of today's razzle-dazzle 
Tomorrow the tune is never quite the same 
Tomorrow's children have it their own way 

When the yes-men no longer yes 
or the no-men shift their no 
anything is in the cards 

Ask the public relations counsel 
He is a shortstop and a scavenger 
smooth as a big league umpire 
cool as a veteran horse race ]Ockey 
cool as a cube of cucumber on ice 
He will tell you there is a public 
and this public has many relations 
and you can't have too much counsel 
when you're trying to handle it 

Our ghost writers will ghost for you 

they write it, you hand it out 

or you speak the speech wntten for you 

and nobody knows but the ghost 

and the ghost is paid 

for helping you with your public 



574 


  


The cheer leader struts his stuff, 
wigwags the swaying grand stand, 
throws himself into alphabetical shapes 
trying to orchestrate his crowd 
the fads and fashions innovators, 
the halitosis and body odor fnghteners, 
the skin and complexion fixers, 
the cigarette ads lying about relative values, 
the nazi imitators, the fascisti imitators, 
the ku klux klan and the konklave's wizard, 
the makers of regalia, insignia, masks, 
hoods, hats, nightshirts, skull-and-crossbones, 
the spellbinder calling on all true patriots, 
the soapboxer pleading for the proletariat, 
the out-ofiworks marching marching 
with demands and banners, "'why? why?'^ 
the strike leader telling why the men walked out, 
the milhon-dollar-national-sales-campaign director, 
the headache copy writer groping for one new idea, 
the drive organizers planning their hoorah, 
the neighborhood captains of tens and twenties, 
the besbseller authors, the by-line correspondents, 
the President at the White House microphone, 
the Senators, Congressmen, spokesmen, at microphones— 
Each and all have a target. 

Each one aims for the pmg ping 
the bhng bling of a sharpshooter 
Here is a moving colossal show, 
a vast dazzling aggregation of stars and hams 
selling things, selling ideas, selling faiths, 
selling air, slogans, passions, selling history 
The target is who and what? 

The people, yes- 
sold and sold again 
for losses and regrets, 
for gains, for slow advances, 
for a dignity of deepening roots 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


575 


85 

One memorial stone reads 
^'We, near whose bones you stand, were Iroquois 
The wide land which is now yours, was ours 
Friendly hands have given us back enough for a tomb 

Breeds run out 
and shining names 
no longer shine 

Tribes, clans, nations, have their hour. 

Hang up their records and leave 
Yet who could chisel on a gravestone 

''Here lies John Doe,'' or, 

"Here rest the mortal remains of Richard Roe"' 

And then step back and read the legend and say, 

"Can this be so when I myself am John Doe, 
when I myself am Richard Roe"^ 

pack up your bundle now and go 

be a seeker among voices and faces 

on mam street in a bus station at a union depot 

this generation of eaters sleepers lovers toilers 

flowing out of the last one now buried 

flowing into the next one now unborn 

short of cash and wondering where to^ what next? 

jobs bosses paydays want-ads groceries soap 

board and clothes and a comer to sleep in 

just enough to get by 

when its lamplighting time m the valley 

where is my wandering boy tonight 

in the beautiful isle of somewhere 

the latest extra and another ax murder 

he's forgotten by the girl he can't forget 

she lives in a mansion of aching hearts 

tickets? where to? round tnp or one way? 

room rent coffee and doughnuts maybe a movie 

suit-cases packsacks bandanas 

names saved and kept careful 


57<5 


  


you mustn't lose the address 
and what'll be your telephone number^ 
give me something to remember you by 
be my easy rider 

kiss me once before you go a long one 

flash eyes testaments m a rush 

underhums of plain love with rye bread sandwiches 

and grief and laughter where to^ what next? 


86 

The people, yes, the people, 

Until the people are taken care of one w^ay or another, 

Until the people are solved somehow for the day and hour. 

Until then one hears 'Tes but the people what about the people?” 
Sometimes as though the people is a child to be pleased or fed 
Or again a hoodlum you have to be tough with 
And seldom as though the people is a caldron and a reservoir 
Of the human reserves that shape history. 

The river of welcome wherein the broken First Families fade. 

The great pool wherein wornout breeds and clans drop for restorative 
silence 

Fire, chaos, shadows. 

Events trickling from a thin line of flame 
On into cries and combustions never expected 
The people have the element of surprise 
Where are the kings today? 

What has become of their solid and fastened thrones? 

Who are the temporary puppets holding sway while anything, "'God 
only knows what,” waits around a corner, sits in the shadows and 
holds an ax, waiting for the appointed hour? 

"The czar has eight million men with guns and bayonets 
Nothing can happen to the czar 
The czar is the voice of God and shall live forever 
Turn and look at the forest of steel and cannon 
Where the czar is guarded by eight million soldiers 
Nothing can happen to the czar ” 

They said that for years and m the summer of 1914 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


577 


In the Year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Fourteen 
As a portent and an assurance they said with owl faces 
''Nothing can happen to the czar '' 

Yet the czar and his bodyguard of eight million vanished 
And the czar stood in a cellar before a little firing squad 
And the command of fire was given 
And the czar stepped into regions of mist and ice 
The czar travelled into an ethereal uncharted Siberia 
While two kaisers also vanished from thrones 
Ancient and established m blood and iron — 

Two kaisers backed by ten million bayonets 
Had their crowns in a gutter, their palaces mobbed 
In fire, chaos, shadows, 

In hurricanes beyond foretelling of probabilities, 

In the shove and whirl of unforeseen combustions 
The people, yes, the people, 

Move eternally in the elements of surprise, 

Changing from hammer to bayonet and back to hammer, 
The hallelujah chorus forever shifting its star soloists 

87 

The people learn, unlearn, learn, 
a builder, a wrecker, a builder again, 
a juggler of shifting puppets 
In so few eyeblmks 
In transition lightning streaks, 
the people project midgets into giants, 
the people shrink titans into dwarfs 

Faiths blow on the winds 
and become shibboleths 
and deep growths 
with men ready to die 
for a living word on the tongue, 
for a light alive in the bones, 
for dreams fluttenng in the wrists 

For liberty and authonty they die 
though one is fire and the other water 


578 


  


and the balances of freedom and discipline 
are a moving target with changing decoys 

Revolt and terror pay a price 

Ordei and law have a cost 

What is this double use of fire and water^ 

Where are the rulers who know this riddle^ 

On the fingers of one hand you can number them 
How often has a governor of the people first 
learned to govern himselP 

The free man willing to pay and struggle and die 
for the freedom for himself and others 
Knowing how far to subject himself to discipline 
and obedience for the sake of an ordered so- 
ciety free from tyrants, exploiters and 
legalized frauds— 

This free man is a rare bird and when you meet 
him take a good look at him and try 
to figure him out because 
Some day when the United States of the Earth 
gets going and runs smooth and pretty there 
will be more of him than we have now 

88 

The response of wild birds 

to a home on the way, 

a stopping place of rest, 

this and the wish of a child 

to eat the moon 

as a golden ginger cookie— 

this IS m the songs of the people 

The clods of the earth hold place 

close to the whir of yellow hummingbird wings 

and they divide into those hard of hearing 

and those whose ears pick off 

a smooth hush with a little wind whimper across it 

and then again only the smooth hush 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


579 


What are these dialects deep under the bones 
whereby the people of ages and races far apart 
reach out and say the same clay is in all, 
bringing out men whose eyes 
search the earth and see no aliens anywhere, 
pronouncing across the barriers the peculiar word 
"Brother"? 

Washing his shirt m a jungle near Omaha, 
warming his java under a C B &Q bridge, 
a hobo mumbled to himself a mumbling poem 
and said it was an outline of history 
and you could take it or leave it, 
you could ride the rods or hunt an empty 
and he would mumble 

"A hammering, a neverending hammering goes on 
Suns and moons by platoons batter down 
the shovels and the clamps 
of other suns and moons 

"By platoons always by platoons under a hammering, 
the cries of the tongs go khng klong 
to the bong bong of the hammers " 

The bulls took him in 
The bulls gathered him 
In the lockup he thought it over 
In the cooler he was not so hot, 

They said, and further they said. 

He was nuts, he was dopey from white mule 
Yet he kept on with his mumbling 
of the shovels and the clamps, 
of the tongs going khng klong 
and the bong bong of the hammers, 
of history and its awful anvils 

"Listen," he cried, 

"Khng klong go the mighty hammers, 
khng klong on a mighty anvil, 
steel on steel they clash and weld, 
how long can you last? how long? 




580 


  


goes the clamor of the hammer and the anvil, 
how long^ goes the steel kling klong 
the gunmetal blue gives it and takes it 
in the fire and the pounding 
the hard old answer goes 
let the works go on 
I will last a long time yet a long time 

A fly-by-night house, a shanty, 
a ramshackle hut of tarpaper, tin cans, 
body by fisher, frames from flivvers, 
a shelter from rain and wind, 
the home of a homeseeker having an alibi, 
why did two hungers move across his face^ 

One when do we eat? 

The other What is worth looking at? 

what is worth listening to? 
why do we live? 
when IS a homeseeker 

just one more trespasser? 
and what is worth dying for? 

89 

Marshall Field the First was spick and span while alive 
and wishing to be well kept and properly groomed 
in the long afterward 
he stipulated in a clause of his will 
a fund of $25,000 be set aside and its income be devoted 
to the upkeep of his tomb 

The country editor of Stoughton, Wisconsin, 
was not so careful, less spick and span 
He left orders to the typesetters and they obeyed him. 

His obituary read “Charlie Cross is dead ” 

And that was all 

John Eastman died leaving the Chicago Journal to four men, 
to four old fnends who knew how to get out the paper 
And to make sure the obsequies would be correct and decent 
he instructed in his last will and testament 
“Let no words of praise be spoken at my funeral.” 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


581 


What about that Chinese poet 
traveling on a cart 
with a ]ug of wine, 
a shovel and a grave-digger? 

Each morning as they started 
he told the grave-digger 
“Bury me when I am dead— 
anywhere, anytime ” 

He was afraid of a fancy funeral 
What did he have? 

He would be covered down like any coolie 

“anywhere, anytime,” no music, no flowers 

What about that radio operator m the North Atlantic 
on a stormlashed sinking Scandinavian ship 
laughing the wireless message 
‘God pity the poor sailors on a night like this” 
adding word they were heading for Davy Jones’ locker 
and adding further 

“This IS no night to be out without an umbrella'” 

What about him? 

And what did he have? 

He went to a sea-tomb laughing an epitaph 

“This IS no night to be out without an umbrella ” 

Who was that professor at the University of Wisconsin working out a 
butter-fat milk tester 

Good for a million dollars if he wanted a patent with sales and royalties 
And he whistled softly and in dulcet tone What in God’s name do 1 
want with a million dollars? 

Whistling as though instead of his owning the million it would own him 

Who was that South Dakota Norwegian who 
went to Siberia and brought back 
Wheat grains pushing the North Amencan wheat 
area hundreds of miles northward? 

He could have had a million dollars and took 
instead a million thanks 

Why did the two high wizards of applied 
electrodynamics say 



5S2 


  


All they wanted was board and clothes and time 
to think things over? 

Why did they go along so careless about dollars, 
so forgetful about millions, 

Letting others organize and gather the shekels 
and progress from boom to crash to boom 
to crash? 

Why is the Schenectady hunchback dwarf one 
of the saints in shirtsleeves? 

And why did the deaf mechanic in Orange, New 
Jersey, forget to eat unless his wife called 
him, 

And why did he die saying What is electricity? 
we don't know What is heat? we don't know 
We are beginners ''Look at the moon— it 
winks at the ignorance of the world " 

What of the Wright boys in Dayton? Just around the corner they had 
a shop and did a bicycle business— and they wanted to fly for the 
sake of flying 

They were Man the Seeker, Man on a Quest Money was their last 
thought, their final absent-minded idea 

They threw out a lot of old mistaken measurements and figured new ones 
that stood up when they took off and held the air and steered a 
course They proved "the faster you go the less power you need " 

One of them died and was laid away under blossoms dropped from zoom- 
ing planes The other lived on to meditate what is attraction? when 
will we learn why things go when they go? what and where is the 
power? 

Why is raggedy Johnny Appleseed half-man half-myth? From old cider 
mills he filled his sacks with apple-seeds and out of his plantings came 
orchards in Ohio and Indiana "God ordained me a sower to sow that 
others might reap " Why will they remember the earthly shadow of 
Johnny with bronze figures tomorrow in Ohio and Indiana? 

Was it true that Van Gogh cut off 
one of his ears 
and gave it to a daughter 
of the streets, 

to one who had pleasured him? 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


583 


And if he did what did he mean by it? 

And who could guess what Van Gogh 
had in mind if anything in particular? 

In and out by thousands they went 
to see the Van Gogh exhibit 
of paintings touring Amenca, 
in and out by thousands 
finding the color and line 
of a plain strange personality, 
something dear and rich 
out of the umber of the earth 
Somewhere in what he flung from his brush 
was a missing ear 
and why it might be missed 
and a blunt gesture, 

“What of It?” 

Why did the St Louis Mirror editor name as his favorite Shakespeare 
line “I myself am but indifferent honest”? and how did he mean it 
when in an owl-car dawn, ending a long night of talk, he blurted to 
a poet, “God damn it, I tell you there are no bad people”? 

Who was the St Louis mathematician who figured it cost an average of 
$37,000 to kill each soldier killed m the World War? 

He figured too on a way of offering, in case of war, $1,000, one grand, to 
every deserting soldier 

Each army, the idea ran, would buy off the other before the war could 
get started 

Who was that Pittsburgh Scotchman terronzed by having a quarter bil- 
lion dollars? 

Why did he give it away before he died as though he could never take it 
away with him? 

Who was the Ghicago Jew who threw millions of dollars into Negro 
schools of the South? 

Why did he once tell another Jew, “I’m ashamed to have so much 
money”? 

“There are no pockets in the shroud” may be carried farther 

“The dead hold in their clenched hands only that which they have given 

away ” 



$84 


  


Who was that Roman “I am a man and nothing on legs and human is 
a stranger to me”? 

He could have met the first Negro who sang “When you see me laugh- 
ing I’m laughing to keep from crying ” 

Did he give them a high and roaring laughter when he had his throne 
moved out into the sea, 

When he sat in his sea-set throne and commanded the tide “Go back' 
go back' it is I, King Knute who tell you so and I am putting you to 
this test because a circle of my advisers have told me over and again 
that I am beyond other plain people, I am made of no common clay 
and what I say goes and even the ocean will obey me and do what 
I say and therefore I give you the order to Go back' go back' and 
don’t dare bring your stink of seawrack and salt water even to the foot- 
stool of this royal throne of mine”? 

Did he give them a high and roaring laughter as the tide slowly and in- 
exorably rose over his footstool, to his knees, to his navel, to his neck, 

When he rose, plunged and swam ashore and told them to let the throne 
be washed out to ]oin the flotsam and jetsam of the immemorial sea? 

Who was the young Nicodemus in Chicago so early in the twentieth cen- 
tury falling heir to a million dollars and writing a pamphlet of public 
inquiry titled The Confessions of a Drone and having one luminous 
and quivering question to ask- 

Why was this money wished on me merely because I was bom where I 
couldn’t help being born so that I don’t have to work while a lot of 
people work foi me and I can follow the races, yacht, play horse polo, 
chase if I so choose any little international chippie that takes my eye, 
eat nightingale tongues, buy sea islands or herds of elephants or 
trained fleas, or go to Zanzibar, to Timbuctoo, to the mountains of 
the moon, and never work an hour or a day and when I come back 
I find a lot of people worbng for me because I was born where I 
couldn’t help being born? 


90 

The big fish eat the little fish, 
the httle fish eat shrimps 
and the shnmps eat mud 

You don’t know enough to come in when it rams 
You don’t know beans when the bag is open 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


585 


You don^t know enough to pound sand in a rat hole. 

All I know IS what I hear 
All I know IS what I read in the papers 
All I know you can put in a thimble 
All I know I keep forgetting 

We have to eat, don't we^ 

You can't eat promises, can you? 

You can't eat the Constitution, can you^ 

I can eat crow but I don't hanker after it 
Don't quarrel with your bread and butter 
Some curse the hand that feeds them 
Many kiss the hands they wish to see cut off 
You can't rob a naked man of his clothes 
He that makes himself an ass, men will ride him 
Stand like a good mule and you're soon harnessed 

Be not rash with thy mouth 
Praise no man before his death, 

When pups bark old dogs go along doing whatever 
it was they were doing 

He who blackens others does not whiten himself 
The camel has his plans, the camel driver his plans 
The horse thinks one thing, he who saddles him another 
Ask me no questions and I tell you no lies 
The best witness is a written paper 
Liars should have good memories 
Some liars get monotonous 
Hearsay is half lies 
To say nothing is to say yes 
Hold your tongue one second and 
a bundle of trouble is held off 
Be careful what you say or 
you go out of the door 
and meet yourself coming m 
Hunger and cold deliver a man to his enemy 
Hunger says to hell with the law 
The empty belly mstmcts the tongue 
Want changes men into wild animals 
Unless you say eat the hungry belly can't 
hear you 


586 


  


91 

Who were those editors piching the most 
detestable word in the English language 
and deciding the one word just a little 
worse than any other you can think of 
IS “Exclusive”? 

The doorbells were many and the approaches screened and the comers 
hushed in the care of frozen-faced butlers and footmen in livery, 
London trained, chauffeurs, cooks, maids, twenty-two when counted, 
for personal service in the Lake Shore Drive apartments overlooking 
one blue of water meeting another blue of skyline 

And one young man yawned over his real estate and secunties, his Chi- 
cago and Manhattan skyscrapers, his silk mills in France, his woolen 
mills in Scotland, his cotton mills north and south in the States, 
yawned over the caretakers and trustees sober and dependable in cus- 
tody of what had grown since he was a baby to whom accrued from 
a dying father an estate beyond one hundred millions, one blue of 
water meeting another blue of skyline then as now Across the dust 
and roar of Halsted Street he rode one afternoon into the seething 
jungles and slums of the West Side, to yawn and smile, “This is No 
Man’s Land to me,” never to go back, to sense it as a dull and alien 
rabble, a polyglot of panhandlers mooching pig-stickers, structural 
ironworkers after a day with rivets and bolts lifting schooners of beer 
to laugh, “Here every man is as good as the next one and for the 
matter of that a little better ” 

To a Long Island Sound country mansion he fled and in a scarlet English 
hunting coat shot pheasants by the hundreds with retainers loading 
the guns for him and his guests, to Buckingham Palace he flitted, to 
the African gold coast, to the Riviera, to Biarritz, to nowhere among 
multiplied nothings, from wife to wife and tweedledum to tweedledee, 
in car, yacht and plane fleeing from No Man’s Land, with a personal 
service staff of twenty-two when counted, and always from the Lake 
Shore Drive one blue of water meeting another blue of skyline 

And who are these others? 

Why, they are the three tailors of Tooley Street, signing themselves, “We, 
the people,” 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


587 


Having an audacity easier to look at than three others, namely, one prime 
minister, one banker, one munitions maker, in the name of the people 
letting loose a war 

These others, you may have read, are “the great unwashed,” “the hoi 
polloi,” they are indicated with gestures 

“The rabble,” “the peepul,” “the mob with its herd instinct in its wild 
stampede,” “the irresponsible ragtag and bobtail”— 

Can they also be the multitude fed by a miracle on loaves and fishes, les 
mis^rables in a pit, in a policed abyss of want? 

Was it this same miscellany heard the Sermon on the Mount, the Gettys- 
burg Speech, the Armistice Day news when confetti dotted the 
window-sills and white paper blew in snowdrifts on the city streets? 

And in the Gettysburg speech was it written, “of the peepul, by the 
peepul, and for the peepul”? 

When they gather the voices and prints from above what most often do 
they hear and read? 

They are told to go north and south at once, for liberty, to go east and 
west at once, for liberty 

The advice is pounded in their ears, “Go up, go down, stand where you 
are, for liberty ” 

In one ear comes the clamor, “You are damned if you do,” in the other 
ear, “You are damned if you don’t ” 

And when liberty is all washed up the dictators say 

“You are the greatest people on earth and we shall shoot only as 
many of you as necessary.” 

Out of this mass are shaped 
Armies, navies, work gangs, wrecking crews 
Here are the roars to shake walls 
and set roofs shuddering. 

Hecklers ready with hoots, howls, boos, meeouw, 

Bronx cheers, the razzberry, the bum’s rush. 

Straw hats by thousands thrown from the bleachers. 

Pop bottles by hundreds aimed at an umpire. 

The units of the bargain sale crush, the subway jam, 

The office building emptying its rush hour stream. 

The millions at radio sets for an earful. 

The millions turning newspaper pages for an eyeful 
This IS the source and the headwater 


  


588 


Of tomorrow's Niagara of action, monotony, action, 
rapids, plungers, whirlpool and mist 
of the people and by the people, 
a long street and a vast field of faces, 
faces across an immeasurable mural, 
faces shifting on an incalculable panel, 
touched and dented with line and contrast, 
potatoes winking at cherry blossoms, 
roses here and ashes of roses there, 
thornapple branches hung with redhaws, 
hickory side by side with moss violets, 
the mangelwurzer elbowing the orchid 

Here is a huggermugger becoming 
a cloud of witnesses, a juggernaut, 
the Mississippi asking the peaks of the Rockies, 

'‘How goes it^" 

a hallelujah chorus forever changing its star soloists, 
taking pyramid, pagoda and skyscraper in its stride, 
having survival elements and gifts in perpetuity, 
requiring neither funeral march, memorial nor epitaph 
Why should the continuing generations 
who replenish themselves in the everliving earth 
need any tall symbol set up to be gazed at 
as a sign they are gone, past, through, 
when they are here yet, 
so massively and chorally here yet 
in a multitudinous trampling 
of shoes and wheels, hands and tools, having heard 
"The voice of the people is the voice of God,'' 
having heard, "Be ye comforted for your dreams shall come true on earth 
by your own works," 

having heard, "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you 
free" 


The wheel turns 

The wheel comes to a standstill 

The wheel waits 

The wheel turns 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


589 


''Something began me 
and it had no beginning 
something will end me 
and it has no end '' 

The people is a long shadow 
trembling around the earth, 
stepping out of fog gray into smoke red 
and back from smoke red into fog gray 
and lost on parallels and meridians 
learning by shock and wrangling, 
by heartbreak so often and loneliness so raw 
the laugh comes at least half true, 

"My heart was made to be broken ” 

"Man will never write,'' 
they said before the alphabet came 
and man at last began to write 
"Man will never fly," 
they said before the planes and blimps 
zoomed and purred in arcs 
winding their circles around the globe 

"Man will never make the United States of Europe 
nor later yet the United States of the World, 

"No, you are going too far when you talk about one 
world flag for the great Family of Nations," 
they say that now 

And man the stumbler and finder, goes on, 
man the dreamer of deep dreams, 
man the shaper and maker, 
man the answerer 

The first wheel maker saw a wheel, earned 
in his head a wheel, and one day found his 
hands shaping a wheel, the first wheel 
The first wagon makers saw a wagon, joined 
their hands and out of air, out of what 
had lived in their minds, made the first 
wagon 

One by one man alone and man joined 



590 


  


has made things with his hands 
beginning in the fog wisp of a dim imagining 
resulting in a tool, a plan, a working model, 
bones joined to breath being alive 
in wheels within wheels, ignition, power, 
transmission, reciprocals, beyond man alone, 
alive only with man joined 

Where to^ what next? 

Man the toolmaker, tooluser, 
son of the burning quests 
fixed with roaming forearms, 
hands attached to the forearms, 
fingers put on those hands, 
a thumb to face any finger- 
hands cunning with knives, leather, wood, 
hands for twisting, weaving, shaping— 

Man the flint grinder, iron and bronze welder, 
smoothing mud into hut walls, 
smoothing reinforced concrete into 
bridges, breakwaters, office buildings— 
two hands projected into vast claws, giant hammers, 
into diggers, haulers, lifters 

The clamps of the big steam shovel? man's two hands 
the motor hurling man into high air? man's two hands 
the screws of his skulled head 
joining the screws of his hands, 
pink convolutions transmitting to white knuckles 
waves, signals, buttons, sparks— 
man with hands for loving and strangling, 
man with the open palm of living handshakes, 
man with the closed nails of the fist of combat— 
these hands of man— where to? what next? 

92 

The breathmg of the earth 
may be heard along with 
the music of the sea 
in their joined belongings 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


59i 


Consider the ears of a donkey 

and the varied languages entenng them 

Study the deep-sea squid 

and see how he does only what he has to, 

how the wild ducks of autumn 

come flying in a shifting overhead scroll, 

how rats earn a living and survive 

and pass on their tough germ plasms 

to children who can live where others die 

Mink are spotlessly clean for special reasons 

The face of a goat has profound contemplations 

Only a fish can do the autobiography of a fish 

93 

An aster, a farewell-summer flower, stays long in the last fall weeks. 
Lingers m fence corners where others have shivered and departed 
The whites have mentioned it as the last-rose-of-summer, the red man 
saying, “It-brings-the-frost ” 

Late m the morning and only when sun-warmed does the flower-of-an- 
hour, the good-night-at-noon, open a while and then close its blossoms 
Even in the noon sun the scarlet pimpernel may shut its petals, as a storm 
sign, earning its ancient name of wink-a-peep and sometimes called 
the poor-man’s-weather-glass 

John-go-to-bed-at-noon is the goat's beard plant shutting itself at twelve 
o’clock and showing again only when the next day’s sun is out. 

One looped vine of the hop-growers is a kiss-me-quick and more than one 
red flower blooming in rock corners is a love-lies-bleeding or a look- 
up-and-kiss-me 

The saskatoon is a shadblow looming white m the spring weeks when the 
shad are up the nvers and spawning. 

And hanging its branches with the June berry, the Indian cherry, it is still 
the saskatoon fed by the melted snows of chinooks 

The toadflax, the ox-eye daisy, the pussy willow, rabbit bells, buffalo 
clover, swamp candles and wafer ash. 

These with the windrose and the rockrose, lady slippers, loose-stnfe, thorn 
apples, dragon’s blood, old man’s flannel. 

And the horse gentian, dog laurel, cat-tails, snakeroot, spiderwort, pig 


592 


  


weed, sow thistle, skunk cabbage, goose grass, moonseed, poison 
hemlock. 

These with the names on names between horse radish and the autumn- 
flowering orchid of a lavish harvest moon— 

These are a few of the names clocked and pronounced by the people in 
the moving of the earth from season to season 

The red and white men traded plants and words back and forth 
The Shawnee haw and the Choctaw root, the paw paw, the potato, the 
cohosh and your choice of the yellow puccoon or white, 

A cork elm or a western buckthorn or a burning bush, each a wahoo and 
all of the wahoo family 

These from the tongues of name givers, from a restless name changer, the 
people 


94 

The sea only knows the bottom of the ship 
One gram of wheat holds all the stars 
The bosoms of the wise are the tombs of secrets 
When you must, walk as if on eggshells 
It looks good but IS it foolproof^ 

Only a poor fisherman curses the river he fishes in 
I can read your writing but I can't read your mind. 
Threatened men live long 
The glad hand became the icy mitt 
Applause is the beginning of abuse 
If born to be hanged you shall never be drowned 
Life without a friend is death without a witness 
Sleep IS the image of death 
Six feet of earth make us all of one size 
The oldest man that ever lived died at last 
The turnip looked big till the pumpkin walked m 
The dime looked different when the dollar arrived. 
Who said you are the superintendent? 

Spit on your hands and go to work 
Three generations from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves. 
We won't see it but our children will 


Everything is in the books 

Too many books overload the mind 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


593 


Who knows the answers^ 

Step by step one goes far 
The greatest cunning is to have none at all 
Sow wind and you reap whirlwind 
A hundred years is not much but never is a long while 
A good blacksmith likes a snootful of smoke 
Fire IS a good servant and a bad master 
You can fight fire with fire 
The fireborn are at home in fire. 

The stars make no noise 
You can’t hinder the wind from blowing 
Who could live without hope^ 


95 

Sayings, sentences, what of them? 

Flashes, lullabies, are they worth remembering? 

On the babbling tongues of the people have these been Icept 
In the basic mulch of human culture are these grown 
Along with myths of rainbow gold where you shovel all you want and 
take it away, 

Along with hopes of a promised land, a homestead farm, and a stake m 
the country. 

Along with prayers for a steady job, a chicken m the pot and two cars in 
the garage, the life insurance paid, and a home your own. 

In sudden flash and in massive chaos 
the tunes and cries of the people 
rise in the scripts of Bach and Moussorgsky 
The people handle the food you eat, the clothes you wear, 
and stick by stick and stone by stone 
the houses you live in, roof and walls, 
and wheel by wheel, tire by tire, 
part by part your assembled car, 
and the box car loadings of long and short hauls 

Those who have nothing stand in two pressures 
Either what they once had was taken away 
Or they never had more than subsistence 



594 


  


Long ago an easy category was provided for them 
'They live from hand to mouth/' 

Having the name of horny-handed sons of toil 
From these hands howsoever horny, from these sons, 

Pours a living cargo of overwhelming plenty 
From land and mill into the world markets 
Their pay for this is what is handed them 
Or they take no pay at all if the labor market is glutted. 

Losing out on pay if the word is "no hands wanted 

next month maybe 
next year maybe 
the works start " 

96 

Big oil tanks squat next the railroad 
The shanties of the poor wear cinder coats 
The red and blue lights signal 
The control board tells the story 
Lights go on and off on a map 
Each light IS a tram gone by 
Or a tram soon heaving in 
The big chutes grow cold. 

They stack up shadows 

Their humps hold iron ore 

This gang works hard 

Some faces light up to hear 

“We work today— 

what do you know about that?” 

97 

Somebody has to make the tubs and pails 
Not yet do the tubs and pails grow on trees 
and all you do is pick ’em 

For tubs and pails we go first to the bmber cruisers, to the loggers, hewers, 
sawyers, choppers, peelers, pilers, saw filers, skid greasers, slip tenders, 
teamsters, lumber shovers, tallymen, planers, bandsawmen, circular- 
saw-men, hoopers, matchers, nailers, painters, truckmen, packers, 
haulers. 

For the sake of a tub or a pail to you 



THE PEOPLE, YES 


595 


And for the sake of a jack-knife in your pocket, 
or a scissors on your table. 

The dynamite works get into production and deliver to the miners who 
blast, the mule drivers, engineers and firemen on the dinkies, the 
pumpmen, the rope nders, the sinkers and sorters, the carpenters, 
electricians and repairmen, the foremen and straw bosses. 

They get out the ore and send it to the smelters, the converters where by 
the hands and craft of furnace crushers and hot blast handlers, ladlers, 
puddlers, the drag-out man, the hook-up man, the chipper, the span- 
nerman, the shearsman, the squeezer. 

There is steel for the molders, the cutlers, buffers, finishers, forgers, 
grinders, polishers, temperers— 

This for the sake of a jack-knife to your pocket or a shears on your table 
These are the people, with flaws and failings, with patience, sacrifice, de- 
votion, the people 

The people is a farmer, a tenant and a share-cropper, a plowman, a plow- 
grinder and a choreman, a chumer, a chicken-picker and a combine 
driver, a threshing crew and an old settlers’ picnic, a creamery co- 
operative, or a line of men on wagons selling tomatoes or sugar-beets 
on contract to a cannery, a refinery. 

The people is a tall freight-handler and a tough longshoreman, a greasy 
fireman and a gambling oil-well shooter with a dnller and tooler 
ready, a groping miner going underground with a headlamp, an engi- 
neer and a fireman with an eye for semaphores, a seaman, deckhand, 
pilot at the wheel in fog and stars 

The people? A weaver of steel-and-concrete floors and walls fifty floors up, 
a blueprint designer, an expert calculator and accountant, a carpenter 
with an eye for joists and elbows, a bncklayer with an ear for the pling 
of a trowel, a pile-driver crew pounding down the pier-posts 
The people? Harness bulls and narcotic dicks, multigraph girls and soda- 
jerkers, hat girls, bat boys, sports writers, ghost wnters, popcorn and 
peanut squads, flatfeet, scavengers, mugs saying “Aw go button your 
nose,” squirts hollering “Aw go kiss yourself outa dis game mtuh 
anuddah,” dead-heads, hops, cappers, come-ons, tin horns, small 
timers, the night club outfits helping the soup-and-fish who have to 
do something between midnight and bedtime 
The people? A puddler in the flaring splinters of newmade steel, a milk- 
wagon-driver getting the once-over from a milk inspector, a sand-hog 
with “the bends,” a pack-rat, a snow-queen, janitors, jockeys, white 



596 


  


collar lads, pearl divers, peddlers, bundlestiffs, pants pressers, cleaners 
and dyers, lice and rat exterminators 

So many forgotten, so many never remembered at all, yet there are well- 
diggers, school-teachers, window washers who unless buckled proper 
dance on air and go down down, coal heavers, roundhouse wipers, 
hostlers, sweepers, samplers, weighers, sackers, carvers, bloom chippers, 
kiln burners, cocks, bakers, beekeepers, goat raisers, goat hay growers, 
slag-rollers, melters, solderers, track greasers, jiggermen, snow-plow 
drivers, clamdiggers, stoolpigeons, the buck private, the gob, the leath- 
erneck, the cop-— 

In uniform, in white collars, m overalls, in denim and gingham, a number 
on an assembly line, a name on a polling list, a post oflEce address, a 
crime and sports page reader, a movie goer and radio listener, a stock- 
market sucker, a sure thing for slick gamblers, a union man or non- 
union, a job holder or a job hunter, 

Always either employed, disemployed, unemployed and employable or 
unemployable, a world series fan, a home buyer on a shoestring, a 
down-and-out or a game fighter who will die fighting 

The people is the grand canyon of humanity 
and many many miles across 
The people is pandora's box, humpty dumpty, 
a clock of doom and an avalanche when it 
turns loose 

The people rest on land and weather, on time 
and the changing winds 
The people have come far and can look back 
and say, '*We will go farther yet " 

The people is a plucked goose and a shorn 
sheep of legalized fraud 
And the people is one of those mountain slopes 
holding a volcano of retribution, 

Slow m all things, slow in its gathered wrath, 
slow m its onward heave, 

Slow in its asking 'Where are we now? what time 

IS It?" 


98 

Hold down the skylines now with your themes, 
Proud marching oblongs of floodlighted walls. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


597 


Your bottom rocks and caissons rest 
In money and dreams, in blood and wishes 

Stand on your tall haunches of checkered windows 
with your spikes of white light 
Speaking across the cool blue of the night mist 
Can we read our writing? 

What are we saying on the skyline? 

Tell it to us, skyscrapers around Wacker Drive in Chicago, 

Tall oblongs in orchestral confusion from Battery to Bronv, 

Along Market Street to the Ferry flashing the Golden Gate sunset, 
Steel-and-concrete witnesses gazing down in San Antonio on the little old 
Alamo, 

Gazing down in Washington on the antiques of Pennsylvania Avenue 
what are these so near my feet far down? 

Blinking across old Quaker footpaths of the City of Brotherly Love what 
have we here? shoobng crossed lights on the old Boston Common 
who goes there? 

Rising in Duluth to flicker with windows over Lake Supenor, standing up 
in Atlanta to face toward Kenesaw Mountain, 

Tall with steel automotive roots in Detroit, with transport, coal and oil 
roots in Toledo, Cleveland, Buffalo, flickenng afar to the ore barges 
on Lake Erie, to the looming chainstore trucks on the hard roads. 
Wigwagging with air beacons on Los Angeles City Hall, telling ffie Mis- 
sissippi traffic it’s night-time in St Louis, New Orleans, Minneapolis 
and St Paul— 

Can we read our writing? what are we saying on the skyline? 

Hold down your horizon spikes of light, proud marching oblongs 
Your bottom rocks and pilings rest in money and dreams, in blood and 
wishes 

The structural iron workers, the riveters and bolt catchers, know what you 
cost 

Yes, who are these on the harbor skyline. 

With the sun gone down and the funnels and checkers of light talking? 
Who are these tall witnesses? who these high phantoms? 

What can they tell of a thousand years to come. 

People and people rising and fading with the springs and autumns, people 


598 


  


like leaves out of the earth m spring, like leaves down the autumn 
wind— 

What shall a thousand years tell a young tumultuous restless people^ 
They have made these steel skeletons like themselves— 

Lean, tumultuous, restless 

They have put up tall witnesses, 
to fade in a cool midnight blue, 
to rise in evening rainbow prints 


99 

The man in the street is fed 
with lies m peace, gas in war, 
and he may live now 
]ust around the corner from you 
trying to sell 

the only thing he has to sell, 
the power of his hand and brain 
to labor for wages, for pay, 
for cash of the realm 
And there are no takers, he can't connect 
Maybe he says, ''Some pretty good men are on the street " 
Maybe he says, "Tm just a palooka all washed up " 
Maybe he's a wild kid ready for his first stickup 
Maybe he's bummed a thousand miles and has a diploma. 
Maybe he can take whatever the police can hand him. 

Too many of him saying in their own wild way, 

'The worst they can give you is lead m the guts " 
Whatever the wild kids want to do they'll do 
And whoever gives them ideas, faiths, slogans. 

Whoever touches the bottom flares of them. 

Connects with something prouder than all deaths 

For they can live on hard corn and like it 

They are the original sons of the wild jackass 

Crowned and clothed with what the Unknown Soldier had 

If he went to his fate m a pride over all deaths 

Give them a cause and they are a living dynamite 

They are the game fighters who will die fighting 


Here and there a man in the street 
IS young, hard as nails. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


599 


cold with questions he asks 
from his burning insides 

Bred in a motorized world of tnal and error 
He measures by millionths of an inch, 

Knows ball bearings from spiral gearings, 

Cham transmission, heat treatment of steel. 

Speeds and feeds of automatic screw machines. 

Having handled electric tools 
With pistol grip and trigger switch 
Yet he can’t connect and he can name thousands 
Like himself idle amid plants also idle 
He studies the matter of what is justice 
And revises himself on money, comfort, good name 
He doesn’t know what he wants 
And says when he gets it he’ll know it 
He asks, “Why is this what it is?” 

He asks, “Who is paying for this propaganda?” 

He asks, “Who owns the earth and why?” 

Here and there a wife or sweetheart sees with him 
The pity of being sold down the river in a smoke 
Of confusions taken from the mouths of the dead 
And spoken as though those dead are alive now 
And would say now what they said then 

“Let him go as far as he likes,” says one lawyer who sits on several heavy 
directorates 

‘What do we care? Is he any of our business? If he knew how he could 
manage 

“There are exceptional cases but where there is poverty you will generally 
find they were improvident and lacking in thrift and industry 
“The system of free competition we now have has made America the 
greatest and richest country on the face of the globe 
“You will seek m vain for any land where so large a number of people 
have had so many of the good things of life 
“The malcontents who stir up class feeling and engender class hatred are 
the foremost enemies of our republic and its constitutional govern 
ment ” 

And so on and so on in further confusions taken from the mouths of the 
dead and spoken as though those dead are alive now and would say 
now what they said then 


6oo 


  


Like the form of a seen and unheard prowler. 
Like a slow and cruel violence, 

IS the known unspoken menace 
Do what we tell you or go hungry, 
listen to us or you don't eat 

He walks and walks and walks 

and wonders why the hell he built the road 

Once I built a railroad 
now 

brother, can you spare a dime? 

To his dry well a man carried 
all the water he could carry, 
primed the pump, drew out the water, 
and now 

he has all the water he can carry 

We asked the cyclone 
to go around our barn 
but it didn't hear us 


100 

The Great Sphinx and the Pyramids say 
''Man passed this way and saw 
a lot of Ignorant besotted pharaohs " 

The pink pagodas, jade rams and marble elephants 
of China say 

"Man came along here too 

and met suave and cruel mandarins " 

The temples and forums of Greece and Rome say: 
"Man owned man here where man bought and sold 
man in the open slave auctions, by these chat- 
tels stone was piled on stone to make these now 
crumbled pavilions " 

The medieval Gothic cathedrals allege 
"Mankind said prayers here for itself and for stiff- 
necked drunken robber barons " 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


6oi 


And the skyscrapers of Manhattan, Detroit, Chi- 
cago, London, Pans, Berlin— what will they 
say when the hoarse and roaring years of 
their origin have sunk to a soft whispering? 

Will the same fathoms come for the skyscrapers? 

Will the years heave and the wind and ram haul 
and hover 

Till sand and dust have picked the locks and blown 
the safes and smashed the windows and filled 
the elevator-shafts and packed the rooms and 
made ashes of the papers, the stocks and bonds, 
the embossed and attested securities? 

Will it be colder and colder yet with ice on the 
ashes? 

Even diough the title-deeds read “forever and in 
perpetuity unto heirs and assigns for all time 
this deed is executed”? 

Will it be all smoothed over into a hush where no 
one pleads 

“Who were they? where did they come from? and 
why were they in such a hurry when they 
knew so little where they were going?” 

As between the ralers and the ruled-over what 
does the record say? 

Name the empires and republics with rulers wise 
beyond their people 

When have they read the signs and recognized a 
bridge generation? 

When have the overlords and their paid liars and 
stmmpets 

Held as a first question, “What do the people want 
besides what we tell them they ought for their 
own good to want?”? 

And second, “How much of living fact is under 
these cries and revolts, these claims that ex- 
ploiters nde the people?”? 

And third, “What do they do to themselves who 
sell out the people?”? 


6o2 


  


When hush money is paid 
to whom does it go 
and by whom is it paid 
and why should there be a hush? 

When aldermen and legislative membeis say, 

''We can put this through for you but it will take a 
little grease/' 

What is the grease they mean and from whom 
comes this grease? 

Let this be spoken of softly Let sleeping dogs he 
What you don't know won't hurt you 

The trail leads straight to those in the possession of 
grease, the big shots of bespoken and anointed 
interests 

When violence is hired 
and murder is paid for 
and tear gas, clubs, automatics, 
and blam blam machine guns 
)Oin in the hoarse mandate, 

"Get the hell out of here," 
why then reserve a Sabbath 
and call it a holiness day 
for the mention of Jesus Christ 
and why drag in the old quote, 

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself"? 

Said a lady wearing orchids 

for a finality they betoken 

distinct from cabbages 

aloof from potatoes 

and speaking with a white finality 

from a face molded m half -secrets 

"Some things go unspoken m our circle 

no one has the bad grace to bring them up 

they exist and they don't 

when you belong you don't mention them." 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


603 


Between highballs at the club amid the commodious leather chairs, only 
the souse, the fool, would lift a glass with the toast 
^'Here^s to the poor* let 'em suffer, they're used to it " 

And if a boy fresh from college and the classics offers the point, ''Money 
sometimes rots people," 

He'll hear from someone "Maybe so but you can't have too big a surplus 
to take care of the future " 

"There are men who can be hired 
for work that must be done 
and I would rather hire them 
than do the work myself " 

Thus in the front ofEce 
the big fellow in charge, 
hired by absentee owners, 
hired for work that must be done, 
has an alibi and good reasons 
unless he keeps out of the red 
he too goes he hires and fires 
he IS the overseer m his ears 
one droning iron murmur 
"We want results, re-sults 
"You'll show results or else " 

So he hires and fires 
new names go on the payroll, 
old names are dropped 
personnel, production, outlet, sales, 
each has its own heebie-jeebies, 
each brings its special jitters 
the picture always changes 
one little innocent new idea 
one harmless looking patent 
can wreck the works, the payrolls, 
the mahogany front office, 
the absentee owners 
unless the competitor is watched 
and met and handled, 
either killed off or satisfied, 
the works go to rust, 


6o4 


  


to the weavers of cobwebs 
weaving in iron and mahogany 
Thus in the front office amid the desk buttons 
and the switchboard phone and the private line, 
amid slips holding safe-combination-numbers, 
amid the keys to safe-deposibvaults 
and the documents known to associates and attorneys 
besides other documents held in reserve, 
written communications private and confidential, 
spoken messages not to be put m writing, 
memoranda in low tone to Jones for immediate attention 
and withheld from Abernathy for definite reasons 
Abernathy having plenty enough to do as it is, 
items touching rivals real and potential, 
competitors ruthless with a jungle cunning, 
competitors fighting in the open with a decent code, 
competitors in the red and dazed by the graph 
of volume and sales sliding down always down, 
telegrams to be sent m cipher strictly and see to it, 
telegrams for the press, for Congress, for the public, 
quarterly earnings report for investors, 
fully detailed report for the Chairman of the Board, 
information sheets to be scanned and torn up, 
other notations to be read closely and filed 
in a fireproof private vault with a time-lock, 
signed agreements hardly worth the public eye, 
schedules, rebates, allowances, working arrangements— 
amid these props 
of time and circumstance 
a big shot executive sits 

with an eye on the board of directors first of all, 
next the stockholders owning control, 
next the vast eggheaded investing public, 
and after these the men who run the works 
from the engineers, chemists, geologists, intelligentsia 
on to the white collar clerks and bookkeepers 
and the overall crews who take whatever weather comes, 
in fumes and dust, in smoke, slag and cinders 
meeting production and delivery demands— 
and finally the buyers, the consumers, the customers. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


605 

the people, yes, what will we let them have? 

Around a big table— decisions— 
wages up, wages down, wages as is— 
prices up, prices down, prices as is— 
this IS the room and the big table 
of the high decisions 
They may consider lower prices 
for the benefit of the consumer 
or again to wreck a competitor 
They may hold prices down 
because it's worth something to have 
the good will of the public, the mass buyers 
Or they may raise prices and get all they can 
while the getting is good, explaining, 

“We are not in business for our health, 
what we lose or win is our business " 

Some of them trail with Marshall Field 
“The customer is always right," others with 
Cornelius Vanderbilt “The public be damned " 

Others say one thing and do another 
And what have we here? what is this huddle? 

Shall we call them scabs on their class? 

Or are they talking to hear themselves talk? 

They say Yes to Ford, to Filene, to Johnson, 

to the Brookings Institution one little idea 

After allowing for items to protect future operation 

every cut in production cost should be shared 

with the consumers in lower prices 

with the workers in higher wages 

thus stabilizing buying power 

and guarding against recurrent collapses 

“What is this? Is it economics, poetry or what? 

“Do you think you can run my business? 

“Are you trying to fly the flag 
of Soviet Russia over my office?" 

You're in a room now where you hear 
anything you want to hear 
and the advice often runs 

You can do anything you want to 
unless they stop you 



6o6 


  


Sometimes they fight among themselves 

in a dog-eat-dog struggle 

for control and domination, 

sending an opponent to the Isles of Greece, 

leaving him not even a shirt, 

or letting him leap from a tenth-floor fire-escape 

What is to be said 
of those rare and suave swine 
who pay themselves a fat swag of higher salaries 
in the same year they pay stockholders nothing, 
cutting payrolls in wage reductions and layoffs^ 

What of those payday patriots 
who took three hundred millions of profit dollars 
from powder and supply contracts 
in the same years other men by thousands 
died with valor or took red wounds m a gray rain 
for the sake of a country, a flag^ 

Lincoln had a word for one crew '^respectable scoundrels '' 

They reaped their profits from the government's necessity in money, 
blankets, guns, contracts. 

And when they gambled on defeat in May of '64 and sent gold prices to 
new peaks 

Lincoln groaned, 'T wish every one of them had his devilish head shot off " 

One by one they will pass 
and be laid in numbered graves, 
one by one lights out 
and candles of remembrance 
and rest amid silver handles and heavy roses 
and forgotten hymns sung to their forgotten names 

101 

The unemployed 
without a stake in the country 
without ]obs or nest eggs 
marching they don’t know where 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


607 


marching north south west— 
and the deserts 
marching east with dust 
deserts out of howling dust-bowls 
deserts with winds moving them 
marching toward Omaha toward Tulsa— 
these lead to no easy pleasant conversation 
they fall into a dusty disordered poetry 

“What was good for our fathers is good enough 
for us— let us hold to the past and keep it 
all and change it as little as we have to ” 

Since when has this been a counsel and light 
of pioneers? of discoverers? of inventors? 
of builders? of makers? 

Who should be saying, 

“We can buy anything, we always have, 
we can fix anything, we always have, 
we’re not in the habit of losing, 
on the mam points we have our way, 
we always have”? 

who should be saying that and why? 

As though yesterday is here today 
and tomonow too will be yesterday 
and change on change is never hammered 
on the deep anvils of transition 
the words may be heard 
“Every so often these sons of the wild jackass 
have to be handled Let them come 
We’ve got the arguments, the propaganda machinery, 
the money and the guns Let them come 
WTiat was good for our fathers is good enough for 
us We fight with the founding fathers ” 

What IS the story of the railroads and banks, 
of oil, steel, copper, aluminum, tin? 
of the utilities of light, heat, power, transport? 
what are the balances of pride and shame? 


6oS 


  


who took hold of the wilderness and changed it^ 

who paid the cost in blood and struggle^ 

what will the grave and considerate historian 

loving humanity and hating no one dead or alive 

have to write of wolves and people^ 

what are the names to be remembered with thanks^ 

Now they justify themselves to themselves 
we took things as we found them 
we never tried to shoot the moon 
we never pretended to be angels 
industry and science are slowly 
making the world a better place to live in 
the weak must go under before the strong 
we'll always have the poor and the incompetent 

What then of those odd numbers 
who have pretended to be angels 
while using the fangs of wolves^ 
and what of the strong ones 
who sat high and handsome 
till they met stronger ones 
till they were torn asunder 
and outwolfed by bigger wolves? 

And who plucked marvels 

of industry and science 

out of unexpected corners 

unless it was the moon shooters 

taking their chances 

out in the great sky of the unknown? 

who but they have held to a hope 

poverty and the poor shall go 

and the struggle of man for possessions 

of music and craft and personal worth 

lifted above the hog-trough level 

above the animal dictate 

'"Do this or go hungry"? 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


609 


102 

“Accordingly, they commenced by an insidious 
debauching of the public mmd they have 
been drugging the public mind ” 

What was this debauchery? what this drugging? 
and how did Abraham Lincoln mean it July 4, 1861? 
The public has a mmd? 

Yes 

And men can follow a method 
and a calculated procedure 
for drugging and debauching it? 

Yes 

And the whirlwind comes later? 

Yes 

Can you bewilder men by the millions 

with transfusions of your own passions, 

mixed with lies and half-lies, 

texts torn from contexts, 

and then look for peace, quiet, good will 

between nation and nation, race and race, 

between class and class? 

Who are these so ready 

with a hate they are sure of, 

with a prepared and considered hate? 

who are these forehanded ones? 

Before the boys in blue and gray 
took the filth and gangrene 
along with the glory. 

Little Aleck Stephens, hazel-eyed 
and shrunken, saw it coming 
“When I am on one of two trains coming in 
opposite directions on a single track, 
both engines at high speed— and both 
engineers drunk — 1 get off at the first 
station ” 


6io 


  


Is there a time to counsel, 

'‘Be sober and patient while yet saying Yes 
to freedom for cockeyed liars and bigots''^ 

Is there a time to say, 

"The facts and guide measurements are yet 
to be found and put to work there are 
dawns and false dawns read in a ball of 
revolving crystals”? 

Is there a time to repeat, 

"The living passion of millions can rise 
into a whirlwind the storm once loose 
who can ride it? you? or you? or you? 
only history, only tomorrow, knows 
for every revolution breaks 
as a child of its own convulsive hour 
shooting patterns never told of beforehand”? 

103 

The wind in the corn leaves among the naked stalks 
and the assurances of the October cornhuskers 
throwing the yellow and gold ears into wagons 
and the weatherworn boards of the oblong corncnbs 
and the heavy boots of winter roaring 
around the bam doors 

and the cows drowsing in peace at the feed-boxes— 
while sheet steel is nveted into ships and bridges 
and the hangar night shift meets the air mail 
and the steam shovels scoop gravel by the ton 
and the interstate trucks parade on the hard roads 
and the bread-line silhouettes stand in a drizzle 
and in Iowa the state fair prize hog cranches corn 
and on the truck farms this year’s scarecrows 
lose the clothes they wore this summer 
and stand next year in a change of rags— 
these are chapters mterwoven of the people. 

When a slow dim light moves 
on the face of vast waters 
and in its slow dim changing 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


6ll 


baffles keen old captains 
the reading of the light 
in its shifting resolves 
IS the same as trymg to read 
the hosts of circumstance 
deepening the paths of action 
with a decree for the people 

“Tomorrow you do this because 
you can do nothing else” 

What IS it now 
in the hosts of circumstance 
where plainspoken men multiply, 
what is it now the people are saying 
near enough to the nbs of life 
and the flowing face of vast waters 
so they will go on saying it 
in deepening paths of action 
running toward a slow dim decree 
“You do this because 
you can do nothing else”? 


104 

When was it long ago the murmunngs began 

and the )Oined murmunngs 

became a moving wall 

moving with the authority of a great sea 

whose Yes and No 

stood in an awful scnpt 

in a new unheard-of handwnting? 

“No longer,” began the murmunngs, 

“shall the king be king 

“nor the son of the king become king 

“Their authonty shall go 

“and their thrones be swept away 

“They are too far from us, the people 

“They listen too little to us, the people 

“They hold their counsels 

“without men from the people given a word 


6i2 


  


'Their ears are so far from us, 

"so far from our wants and small belongings, 

"we must trim the kings 

"into something less than kings 

And the joined murmurmgs became a moving wall 

with Yes and No in an awful script 

And the kings became less 

The kings shrank 

What IS it now 

the people are beginning 

to say— • 

IS it this^ 
and if so 

whither away and 
where do we go 
from here^ 

"What about the munitions and money kings, 
the war lords and international bankers? 
the transpoitation and ciedit kings? 
the coal, the oil, and the mining kings? 
the pnce-fixmg monopoly control kings? 

Why are they so far from us? 

why do they hold their counsels 

without men from the people given a word? 

Shall we keep these kings and let their sons 
in time become the same manner of kings? 

Are their results equal to their authority? 

Why are these interests too sacred for discussion? 
What documents now call for holy daylight? 
what costs, prices, values, are we forbidden to ask? 
Are we slowly coming to understand 
the distinction between a demagogue squawking 
and the presentation of tragic plainspoken fact? 
Shall a robber be named a robber when he is one 
even though bespoken and anointed he is? 

Shall a shame and a crime be mentioned 
when it IS so plainly there, 

when day by day it draws toil, blood, and hunger, 
enough of slow death and personal tragedy to certify 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


613 


the kings who sit today as entrenched kings 
are far too far from their people? 

What does justice say? 

or if justice is become an abstraction or a harlot 
what does her harder sister, necessity, say? 

Their ears are so far from us, 
so far fiom our wants and small belongings 
we must trim these kings of our time 
into something less than kings 
Of these too it will be written 
these kings shrank '' 

What IS it now 

the people are beginning 

to say— 

is it this? 

and if so 

whither away and 
where do we go from here? 

105 

Always the storm of propaganda blows 
Buy a paper Read a book Start the radio 
Listen in the railroad car, in the bus. 

Go to church, to a movie, to a saloon 
And always the breezes of personal opinion 
are blowing mixed with the doctnnes 
of propaganda or the chatter of selling spiels 
Bdieve this, believe that Buy these, buy them 
Love one-two-three, hate four-five-six 
Remember 7-8-9, forget 10-11-12 
Go now, don’t wait, go now at once and buy 
Dada Salts Incorporated, Crazy Horse Crystals, 
for whatever ails you and if nothing ails you 
it IS good for that and we are telling you 
for your own good Whatever you are told, 
you are told it is for your own good and not 
for the speaal interest of those telling you 
Planned economy is forethought and care 


6i4 


  


Planned economy is regimentation and tyranny 
What do you know about planned economy 
and how did this argument get started and why? 

Let the argument go on 

The storm of propaganda blows always 

In every air of today the germs float and hover 

The shock and contact of ideas goes on 

Planned economy will amve, stand up, 

and stay a long time— or planned economy will 

take a beating and be smothered 

The people have the say-so 

Let the argument go on 

Let the people listen 

Tomorrow the people say Yes or No by one question 
“What else can be done?" 

In the drive of faiths on the wind today the people know 
“We have come far and we are going farther yet ” 

Who was the quiet silver-toned agitator who 
said he loved every stone of the streets of 
Boston, who was a believer in sidewalks, and 
had it, “The talk of the sidewalk today is 
the law of the land tomorrow”? 

“The people,” said a farmer’s wife in a Minnesota country store while 
her husband was buying a new post-hole digger, 

“The people,” she went on, “wiU stick around a long time 

“The people run the works, only they don’t know it yet— you wait and see ” 

Who knows the answers, the cold inviolable truth? 

And when have the paid and professional liars done else than bnng wrath 
and fire, wreck and doom? 

And how few they are who search and hesitate and say. 

“I stand in this whirlpool and tell you I don’t know and if I did know I 
would tell you and all I am doing now is to guess and I give you 
my guess for what it is worth as one man’s guess 
“Yet I have worked out this guess for myself as nobody’s yes-man and 
when it happens I no longer own the pnceless little piece of temtory 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


615 


under my own hat, so far gone that I can’t even do my own guessing 
for myself, 

“Then I will know I am one of the unbuned dead, one of the moving 
walking stalking talking unbuned dead ” 


106 

Sleep is a suspension midway 
and a conundrum of shadows 
lost in meadows of the moon 
The people sleep 
All ai' the people sleep 
Yet the sleepers toss in sleep 
and an end comes of sleep 
and the sleepers wake 

Ai' ai' the sleepers wake' 


107 

The people will live on 

The learning and blundering people will live on 
They will be tricked and sold and again sold 
And go back to the nourishing earth for rootholds. 
The people so peculiar in renewal and comeback, 
You can’t laugh off their capacity to take it 
The mammoth rests between his cyclonic dramas. 

The people so often sleepy, weary, enigmatic, 

IS a vast huddle with many units saying 
“I earn my living 
I make enough to get by 
and it takes all my time 
If I had more time 
I could do more for myself 
and maybe for others 
I could read and study 
and talk things over 
and find out about things 
It takes time 
I wish I had the time ” 



6i6 


  


The people is a tragic and comic two-face 
hero and hoodlum phantom and gorilla twist- 
ing to moan with a gargoyle mouth “They 
buy me and sell me it's a game 
sometime I’ll break loose ” 

Once having marched 
Over the margins of animal necessity, 

Over the grim line of sheer subsistence 
Then man came 

To the deeper ntuals of his bones. 

To the lights lighter than any bones. 

To the bme for thinking things over. 

To the dance, the song, the story. 

Or the hours given over to dreaming. 

Once having so marched 

Between the finite limitations of the five senses 
and the endless yearnings of man for the beyond 
the people hold to the humdrum bidding of work and food 
while reaching out when it comes their way 
for lights beyond the pnsm of the five senses, 
for keepsakes lasting beyond any hunger or death 
This reaching is alive 

The panderers and liars have violated and smutted it. 

Yet this reaching is ahve yet 
for lights and keepsakes 

The people know the salt of the sea 
and the strength of the winds 
lashing the comers of the earth 
The people take the earth 
as a tomb of rest and a cradle of hope 
Who else speaks for the Family of Man? 

They are m tune and step 

with constellations of universal law 

The people is a polychrome, 
a spectrum and a prism 
held in a moving monolith. 


THE PEOPLE, YES 


617 


a console organ of changing themes, 
a clavilux of color poems 
wherein the sea offers fog 
and the fog moves off in ram 
and the labrador sunset shortens 
to a nocturne of clear stars 
serene over the shot spray 
of northern lights 

The steel mill sky is alive 
The fire breaks white and zigzag 
shot on a gun-metal gloaming 
Man IS a long time coming 
Man will yet win 

Brother may yet line up with brother 

This old anvil laughs at many broken hammers 
There are men who can’t be bought 
The firebom are at home in fire 
The stars make no noise 
You can't hinder the wind from blowing 
Time IS a great teacher 
Who can live without hope^ 

In the darkness with a great bundle of gnef 
the people march 

In the night, and overhead a shovel of stars for 
keeps, the people march 

“Where to? what next?" 





FOR 

KENNETH AND LETHA DODSON 



STORMS BEGIN FAR BACK 


Storms begin far back 

You can’t have a storm offhand 
like somebody took a notion and 
decided a storm would be right 
handy to come off now and here 

The moan and lash of the winds 
came out of a place nice for 
them, nice for their growing 

The anger of the waters lay 
breeding, spavraing, pent up 
and ready to go 

The blaze of the prongs, 
the zigzags of forked fire, 
they had a long seed-bme 
in a womb of unborn flame 
before diey went to town 
and came howling, “You don’t 
know what goes on here but 
we’ll tell you ” 

This storm now didn’t come out of nowhere 
—it had a starting place, a home and womb 
—far back it began, brother, sister, 

—far back, sweetheart 


621 


[Voices] 



622 


  


BOOKS MEN DIE FOR 

Lights or no lights, 
so they stand waiting 
books men die for 

For this a man was hanged 
For this a man was burned 
For this two million candles 
snuffed their finish 
For this a man was shot 

Open the covers, they speak, 
they cry, they come out as from 
open doors with voices, heartbeats 

Fools I say hats off 
Fools I say, who did better? 

Fools I say with you 

What of it^ 

You books in the dark now with the lights off. 

You books now with the lights on. 

What is the dnp, dnp, from your covers? 

What IS the lip murmur, the lost winds wandering 

from your covers? 

Books men die for— 

I say with you what of it? 


OPEN LETTER TO THE POET ARCHIBALD MacLEISH WHO 
HAS FORSAKEN HIS MASSACHUSETTS FARM TO 
MAKE PROPAGANDA FOR FREEDOM 

Thomas Jefferson had red hair and a violin 
and he loved life and people and music 
and books and writing and quiet thoughts— 
a lover of peace, decency, good order. 


NEW SECTION 


623 


summer corn ripening for the bins of winter, 
cows in green pastures, colts sucking at mares, 
apple trees waiting to laugh with pippins— 

Jefferson loved peace like a good farmer 
And yet— for eight years he fought in a war— 
writing with his own hand the war announcement 
named The Declaration of Independence 
making The Fourth of July a sacred calendar date 
And there was his friend and comrade 
Ben Franklin, the printer, bookman, diplomat 
all Franklin asked was they let him alone 
so he could do his work as lover of peace and work— 

Franklin too made war for eight years— 

the same Franklin who said two nations 

would better throw dice than go to war— 

he threw in with fighters for freedom— 

for eight years he threw in all he had 

the books, the prmtshop, fun with electncity, 

searches and researches in science pure and applied— 

these had to wait while he joined himself 

to eight long years of war for freedom, independence. 

Now, of course, these two odd fellows 

stand as only two among many 

the list runs long of these fellows, 

lovers of peace, decency, good order, 

who throw in with all they’ve got 

for the abstractions “freedom,” “independence ” 

Stnctly they were gentle men, not hunting trouble. 

Strictly they wanted quiet, the good life, freedom 
They would rather have had the horses of instruction 
those eight years they gave to the tigers of wrath 
The record runs they were both dreamers 
at the same time they refused imitations of the real thing 
at the same time they stood up and talked back 
at the same time they met the speech of steel and cunning with their 
own relentless steel and cunning 

[1940] 


624 


  


MR ATTILA 

They made a myth of you, professor, 
you of the gentle voice, 
the books, the specs, 
the furtive rabbit manners 
in the mortar-board cap 
and the medieval gown 

They didn’t think it, eh professor? 

On account of you’re so absent-minded, 

you bumping into the tree and saying, 

“Excuse me, I thought you were a tree,” 

passing on again blank and absent-minded 

Now it’s “Mr Attila, how do you do?” 

Do you pack wallops of wholesale death? 

Are you the practical dynamic son-of-a-gun? 

Have you come through with a few abstractions? 

Is it you Mr Attila we hear saying, 

“I beg your pardon but we believe we have made some degree of progress 
on the residual qualities of the atom”? 

[August, 1945] 


IS THERE ANY EASY ROAD TO FREEDOM? 

A RELENTLESS man loved France 
Long before she came to shame 
And the eating of bitter dust, 

Loving her as mother and torch, 

As bone of his kith and km 
And he spoke passion, warning* 

“Rest IS not a word of free peoples— 
rest is a monarchical word ” 

A relentless Russian loved Russia 
Long before she came to bare agony 


NEW SECTION 


625 


And valor amid rivers of blood, 

Loving her as mother and torch, 

As bone of his kith and kin 
He remembered an old Swedish saying 
“The Eieboin are at home in fire ” 

A Kentucky-born Illinoisan found himself 
By journey through shadows and prayer 
The Chief Magistrate of the American people 
Pleading in words close to low whispers 
“Fellow citizens we cannot escape histozy. 
The fiery trial through which we pass 
Will light us down in honor or dishonor 
To the latest generation . 

We shall nobly save or meanly lose 

the last best hope of earth ” 

Four little words came worth studying over- 
“We must disenthrall ourselves ” 

And what is a thrall? And who are thralls? 

Men tied down or men doped, or men drowsy? 
He hoped to see them 
shake themselves loose 
and so be disenthralled 

There are freedom shouters 
There are freedom whisperers 
Both may serve 

Have I, have you, been too silent? 

Is there an easy cnme of silence? 

Is there any easy road to freedom? 

[December, 1941] 


626 


  


THE MAN WITH THE BROKEN FINGERS 

(When this tale of methodically inflicted agony was published m The Chicago Times 
Syndicate newspapers August 23, 1942, it brought inqumes whether it was war propa 
ganda or based on an actual incident My informant was a Norwegian ski champion 
known as Lieutenant “Andreas” for the safety of his home kinfolk He gave the inci 
dent as he had it from the son of the mam tragic figure Among many other related 
points was one of German soldiers whose minds began to crack under the strain of the 
inhuman acts required of them by their superiors, such soldiers being returned to Ger 
many as “mental cases” needing therapeutic treatment “Andreas,” a sober and modest 
hero, was killed in a bomber flight over Berlin Friends of “Andreas” say the story below 
had translation into other languages and circulation by undergrounds ) 

The Man with the Broken Fingers throws a shadow 

Down from the spruce and evergreen mountain timbers of Norway— 

And across Europe and the Mediterranean to the oasis palms of Libya— 

He lives and speaks a sign language of lost fingers 

From a son of Norway who slipped the Gestapo nets, the Nazi patrols, 

The story comes as told among those now in Norway 

Shrines m their hearts they have for this nameless man 

Who refused to remembei names names names the Gestapo wanted 

'Tell us these names Who are they"^ Talk* We want those names*'" 

And the man faced them, looked them in the eye, and hours passed and 
no names came— hours on hours and no names for the Gestapo 
They told him they would break him as they had broken others 
The rubber hose slammed around face and neck, 

The truncheon handing pain with no telltale marks, 

Or the distinction of the firing squad and death in a split second— 

The Gestapo considered these and decided for him something else again 
'Tell us those names Who were they? Talk* Names now— or else*" 
And no names came— over and over and no names 

So they broke the little finger of the left hand 

Three fingers came next and the left thumb bent till it broke 

Still no names and there was a day and night for rest and thinking it over 

Then again the demand for names and he gave them the same silence 

And the little finger of the right hand felt itself twisted. 

Back and back twisted till it hung loose from a bleeding socket 
Then three more fingers crashed and splintered one by one 
And the right thumb back and back into shattered bone 


NEW SECTION 


627 


Did he think about violins or accordions he would never touch againi* 
Did he think of baby or woman hair he would never again play with? 

Or of hammers or pencils no good to him any more? 

Or of gloves and mittens that would always be misfits? 

He may have laughed half a moment over a Gestapo job 
So now for a while he would handle neither knife nor fork 
Nor lift to his lips any drinkmg-cup handle 
Nor sign his name with a pen between thumb and fingers 

And all this was halfway— there was more to come 
The Gestapo wit and craft had an aim 

They wanted it known in Norway the Gestapo can be terrible 
They wanted a wide whispering of fear 
Of how the Nazis handle those who won’t talk or tell names 
“We give you one more chance to co-operate ” 

Yet he had no names for them 

His locked tongue, his Norwegian will pitted against Nazi will. 

His pride and faith in a free man’s way, 

His welcoming death rather than do what they wanted— 

They brought against this their last act of fury. 

Breaking the left arm at the elbow. 

Breaking it again at the shoulder socket— 

And when he came to m a flicker of opening eyes 

They broke the right arm first at the elbow, then the shoulder 

By now of course he had lost all memory of names, even his own 

And there are those like you and me and many many others 

Who can never forget the Man with the Broken Fingers 

His will, his pnde as a free man, shall go on 

His shadow moves and his sacred fingers speak 

He tells men there are a thousand wnthing shattering deaths 

Better to die one by one than to say yes yes yes 

When the answer is no no no and death is welcome and death comes soon 
And death is a quiet step into a sweet clean midnight 

[August 23, 1942] 


FREEDOM IS A HABIT 

Freedom is a habit 
and a coat worn 
some bom to wear it 


628 


  


some never to know it 
Freedom is cheap 
or again as a garment 
IS so costly 
men pay their lives 
rather than not have it 
Freedom is baffling 
men having it often 
know not they have it 
till it IS gone and 
they no longer have it 
What does this mean? 

Is it a riddle? 

Yes, it IS first of all 
m the primers of riddles 
To be free is so-so 
you can and you can't 
walkers can have freedom 
only by never walking 
away their freedom 
runners too have freedom 
unless they overrun 
eaters have often outeaten 
their freedom to eat 
and drinkers overdrank 
their fine dnnking freedom 

[June 13, 1943] 


ELEPHANTS ARE DIFFERENT TO DIFFERENT PEOPLE 

Wilson and Pilcer and Snack stood before the zoo elephant 

Wilson said, “What is its name? Is it from Asia or Afnca? Who feeds 
it? Is it a he or a she? How old is it? Do they have twins? How much 
does it cost to feed? How much does it weigh? If it dies, how much will 
another one cost? If it dies, what will they use the bones, the fat, and the 
hide for? What use is it besides to look at?” 

Pilcer didn’t have any questions, he was murmuring to himself, 
“It’s a house by itself, walls and windows, the ears came from tall corn- 
fields, by God, the architect of those legs was a workman, by God, he 


NEW SECTION 


629 


Stands like a bndge out across deep water, the face is sad and the eyes are 
kind, I know elephants are good to babies ” 

Snack looked up and down and at last said to himself, "He’s a tough 
son-of-a-gun outside and I’ll bet he’s got a strong heart, I’ll bet he’s strong 
as a copper-riveted boiler inside ” 

They didn’t put up any arguments 

They didn’t throw anything in each other’s faces 

Three men saw the elephant three ways 

And let it go at that 

They didn’t spoil a sunny Sunday afternoon, 

“Sunday comes only once a week,” they told each other 


ON A FLIMMERING FLOOM YOU SHALL RIDE 

Summary and footnote of and on the testimony of the poet MacLeish under appoint- 
ment as Assistant Secretary of State, under oath before a Congressional examining com- 
mittee pressing him to divulge the portents and meanings of his poems 

Nobody noogers the shaff of a sloo 
Nobody shmbers a wench with a winch 
Nor higgles armed each with a niggle 
and each the flimdrat of a smee, 
each the inbiddy hum of a smoo 

Then slong me dorst with the flagdarsh 
Then creep me deep with the crawbright 
Let idle winds ploodaddle the dorshes 
And you in the gold of the gloaming 
You shall be sloam with the hoolriffs 

On a flimmering floom you shall nde 
They shall tell you bedish and desist 
On a flimmenng floom you shall ride 

  


SCROLL 

Memory is when you look back 
and the answers float m 
to who? what? when? where? 


630 


  


The members who were there then 
are repeated on a screen 
are recalled on a scroll 
are moved in a miniature drama, 
are collected and recollected 
for actions, speeches, silences, 
set forth by images of the mind 
and made m a mingling mist 
to do again and to do over 
precisely what they did do once— 
this is memory— 
sometimes slurred and blurred— 
this is remembering— 
sometimes wrecking the images 
and proceeding again to reconstruct 
what happened and how, 
the many little involved answers 
to who^ what^ when^ where"? 
and more involved than any 
how^ how? 


THE FIREBORN ARE AT HOME IN FIRE 

Luck is a star 
Money is a plaything 
Time is a storyteller 
The sky goes high, big 
The sky goes wide and blue 
And the fireborn— they go far- 
being at home m fire 

Can you compose yourself 
The same as a bright bandana, 

A bandana folded blue and cool, 

Whatever the high howling. 

The accents of blam blam? 

Can I, can John Smith, John Doe, 

Whatever the awful accents. 

Whatever the horst wessel hiss. 


NEW SECTION 


631 


Whatever books be burnt and cnsp, 
Whatever hangmen bnng their hemp, 
Whatever horsemen sweep the sunsets, 
Whatever hidden hovenng candle 
Sways as a wafer of light? 

Can you compose yourself 
The same as a bnght bandana, 

A bandana folded blue and cool? 

Can I, too, drop deep down 
In a pool of cool remembers. 

In a float of fine smoke blue. 

In a keeping of one pale moon, 
Weaving our wrath in a pattern 
Woven of wrath gone down. 

Crossing our scarlet zigzags 
With pools of cool blue. 

With floats of smoke blue? 

Can you, can I, compose ourselves 
In wraps of personal cool blue. 

In sheets of personal smoke blue? 

Bach did it, Johann Sebastian 
So did the one and only John Milton 
And the old slave Epictetus 
And the other slave Spartacus 
And Brother Francis of Assisi 
So did General George Washington 
On a horse, in a saddle. 

On a boat, in heavy snow. 

In a loose cape overcoat 
And snow on his shoulders 
So did John Adams, Jackson, Jefferson 
So did Lincoln on a cavalry horse 
At the Chancellorsville review 

With platoons right, platoons left. 
In a wind nearly blowing the words away 
Asking the next man on a horse 
“What’s going to become of all these 
boys when the war is over?” 




6^2 


  


The shape of your shadow 
Comes from you— and you only? 

Your personal fixed decisions 
Out of you— and your mouth only^ 

Your No, your Yes, your own? 

Bronze old timers belong here 
Yes, they might be saying 
Shade the flame 
Back to final points 
Of all sun and fog 
In the moving frame 
Of your personal eves 
Then stand to the points 
Let hunger and hell come 
Or ashes and shame poured 
On your personal head 
Let death shake its bones 
The teaching goes back far 
Compose yourself 

Luck is a star 
Money is a plaything 
Time is a storyteller 
And the sky goes blue with mornings 
And the sky goes bronze with sunsets 
And the firebom— they go far- 
being at home in fire 

[Collier's, September 1943] 


MR LONGFELLOW AND HIS BOY 
(An old-fashioned recitation to be read aloud) 

Mr Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 
the Harvard Professor, 

the poet whose pieces you see m all the schoolbooks, 
'Tell me not in mournful numbers 
life is but an empty dream ” 


Mr Longfellow sits in his Boston library writing, 

Mr Longfellow looks across the room 
and sees his nineteen-year-old boy 
propped up in a chair at a window, 
home from the war, 

a nfle ball through right and left shoulders 

In his diary the father wntes about his boy 

“He has a wound through him a foot long 
He pretends it does not hurt him ” 

And the father if he had known 
would have told the boy propped up in a chair 
how one of the poems written in that room 
made President Lincoln cry 
And both the father and the boy 
would have smiled to each other and felt good 
about why the President had tears over that poem 

Noah Brooks, the California newspaperman, 
could have told the Longfellows how one day 
Brooks heard the President saying two lines 
“Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State' 

Sail on, O Union, strong and great'” 

Noah Brooks, remembenng more of the poem, speaks 
“Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State' 

Sail on, O Union, strong and great' 

Humanity with all its fears, 

With all the hopes of future years, 

Is hanging breathless on thy fate' 

We know what Master laid thy keel. 

What workmen wrought thy nbs of steel. 

Who made each mast, and sail, and rope, 

What anvils rang, what hammers beat, 

In what a forge and what a heat 
Were shaped the anchors of thy hope' 

Fear not each sudden sound and shock, 

’Tis of the wave and not the rock, 

Tis but the flapping of the sail. 

And not a rent made by the gale' 

In spite of rock and tempest's roar. 


  


634 

In spite of false lights on the shore. 

Sail on, nor fear to breast the sea^ 

Our hearts, our hopes, are all with thee, 

Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears, 

Our faith triumphant o'er our fears, 

Are all with thee— are all with thee’" 

Noah Brooks sees Lincoln's eyes filled with tears, 
the cheeks wet 

They sit quiet a little while, then Lincoln saying 
'It is a wonderful gift to be able to stir men like that " 

Mr Longfellow— and his boy sitting propped up in a chair— 
with a bullet wound a foot long in his shoulders— 
would have liked to hear President Lincoln saying 
those words 

Now Mr Longfellow is gone far away, his boy, too, 
gone far away, 

and they never dreamed how seventy-eight years later 
the living President of the United States, in the White House at Wash- 
ington, 

takes a pen, writes with his own hand on a sheet of paper 
about the Union Ship of State sailing on and on— 
never going down- 

how the President hands that sheet of paper 
to a citizen soon riding high in the air, high over salt water, 
high in the ram and the sun and the mist over 
the Atlantic Ocean, 

nding, pounding, flying, everything under control, 
crossing the deep, wide Atlantic in a day and a night, 
coming to London on the Thames in England, 
standing before the First Minister of the United Kingdom 
so the whole English-language world 
from England across North America to Australia and 
New Zealand 

can never forget Mr Longfellow's lines 
"Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State’ 

Sail on, O Union, strong and great!" 


[Collier's, June 14, 1941] 


NEW SECTION 


035 


THE LONG SHADOW OF LINCOLN A LITANY 

(We can succeed only by concert The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate 
to the stormy present The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with 
the occasion As our case is new so we must think anew and act anew We must dis 
enthrall ourselves December 1, 1862 The Presidenfs Message to Congress) 

Be sad, be cool, be kind, 
remembeiing those now dreamdust 
hallowed m the ruts and gullies, 
solemn bones under the smooth blue sea, 
faces warblown in a falling ram 

Be a brother, if so can be, 
to those beyond battle fatigue 
each m his own corner of earth 
or forty fathoms undersea 
beyond all boom of guns, 
beyond any bong of a great bell, 
each with a bosom and number, 
each with a pack of secrets, 
each with a personal dream and doorway 
and over them now the long endless winds 
with the low healing song of time, 
the hush and sleep murmur of time. 

Make your wit a guard and cover 
Sing low, sing high, sing wide 
Let your laughter come free 
remembering looking toward peace 
'We must disenthrall ourselves ” 

Be a brother, if so can be, 
to those thrown forward 
for taking hardwon lines, 
for holding hardwon points 
and their reward so-so, 
little they care to talk about, 
their pay held in a mute calm, 
highspot memories going unspoken. 


636 


  


what they did being past words, 
what they took being hardwon 
Be sad, be kind, be cool 
Weep if you must 
And weep open and shameless 
before these altars 

There are wounds past words 
There are cripples less broken 
than many who walk whole 
There are dead youths 
with wrists of silence 
who keep a vast music 
under their shut lips, 
what they did being past words, 
their dreams like their deaths 
beyond any smooth and easy telling, 
having given till no more to give 

There is dust alive 
with dreams of Tlie Republic, 
with dreams of the Family of Man 
flung wide on a shrinking globe 
with old timetables, 
old maps, old guide-posts 
torn into shreds, 
shot into tatters, 
burnt in a firewind, 
lost in the shambles, 
faded in rubble and ashes 

There is dust alive 
Out of a granite tomb. 

Out of a bronze sarcophagus. 

Loose from the stone and copper 
Steps a whitesmoke ghost 
Lifting an authontative hand 
In the name of dreams worth dying for. 
In the name of men whose dust breathes 
of those dreams so worth dying for. 


NEW SECTION 


657 


what they did being past words, 
beyond all smooth and easy telling 

Be sad, be kind, be cool, 
remembering, under God, a dreamdust 
hallowed in the rats and gullies, 
solemn bones under the smooth blue sea, 
faces warblown in a falling ram 

Sing low, sing high, sing wide 
Make your wit a guard and cover. 

Let your laughter come free 
like a help and a brace of comfort 

The earth laughs, the sun laughs 
over every wise harvest of man, 
over man looking toward peace 
by the light of the hard old teaching 
''We must disenthrall ourselves ” 

Read as the Phi Beta Kappa poem at the Mother Chapter of William and Mary Col- 
lege, Williamsburg, Virginia, December, 1944 Published m the Saturday Evening Post, 
February, 1945 


WHEN DEATH CAME APRIL TWELVE 1945 

Can a bell ring in the heart 
telling the time, telling a moment, 
telling off a stillness come, 
m the afternoon a stillness come 
and now never come morning^ 

Now never again come morning, 
say the tolling bells repeating it, 
now on the earth m blossom days, 
in earthy days and potato planting, 
now to the stillness of the earth, 
to the music of dust to dust 
and the drop of ashes to ashes 
he returns and it is the time, 


638 


  


the afternoon time and never come morning, 
the voice never again, the face never again 

A bell rings in the heart telling it 
and the bell rings again and again 
remembering what the first bell told, 
the going away, the great heart still— 
and they will go on remembering 
and they is you and you and me and me 

And there will be roses and spring blooms 
flung on the moving oblong box, emblems endless 
flung from nearby, from faraway earth corners, 
from frontline tanks nearing Berlin 

unseen flowers of regard to The Commander, 
from battle stations over the South Pacific 
silent tokens saluting The Commander 

And the whitening bones of men at sea bottoms 
or huddled and mouldering men at Aachen, 
they may be murmuring, 

''Now he IS one of us,'' 
one answering muffled drums 
m the realm and sphere of the shadow battalions 

Can a bell ring proud in the heart 
over a voice yet lingering, 
over a face past any forgetting, 
over a shadow alive and speaking, 
over echoes and lights come keener, come deeper? 

Can a bell ring m the heart 
in time with the tall headlines, 
the high fidelity transmitters, 
the somber consoles rolling sorrow, 
the choirs in ancient laments— chanting 
"Dreamer, sleep deep. 

Toiler, sleep long. 

Fighter, be rested now, 

Commander, sweet good night" 

[Woman's Home CompanioUj June^ 1945] 


659 


Presenf Homf 


JAN, THE SON OF THOMAS 

As I said before one Saturday night 
when the moon hung a curve of flame, 
in the east a baby-shoe of silver 
I must forget the last war, 
never remember the war before, 
nor the wars on wars far back 
I must put them away 
in a black sack filled 
and packed high with forgettings 
and then by one marvel of oblivion 
forget the next war 
putting the war to come 
m the same black sack of forgettings 

This could be a subtle tack 
learned out of patient practice, 
an act of will and humor 
often performed beforehand 
in repeated images of the mind — 
a device of double contemplations 
looking to the east, to the west, 
heanng the voices of the next war 

Was I not always a laughing man? 

Did I ever fail of ready )ests? 

Have I added a final supreme jest? 

They may wnte where my ashes quiver 
“He loved mankind for its very faults 
He knew how to forget all wars past 
He so acted 

as to forget the next war” 




640 


  


PEACE BETWEEN WARS 

Between the long wars 
there has always been peace 
and likewise 
between the short wars 

The longer the wars 
the less was the peace 
while the wars went on 
and the shorter the wars 
the sooner the peace came. 

Whenever the peace 
came to an end 
the resulting war 
always ran 
either short or long 

Whenever a war ended 
the resulting peace 
ran till the next war 

Thus each peace 
had its punctuation 
by a war short or long 
and each war at its end 
ushered m an era 
of peace short or long 

Therefore we know 

absolutely, 

incontestably, 

the peace we now see 

will run 

till the next war begins 
whereupon peace 
will be ushered m 
at the end of the next war 


NEW SECTION 


641 


Beyond this 
we know little 
absolutely, incontestably 


SCRIPTSMITH 

I GIVE you the cosmos, freely the whole works 

Go to it, take the works and ran it 

Or let it run itself 

Maybe if you stand off by yourself 

You’ll see the entire intncate farflung 

shebang of the universe 
the whole complicated sidereal affair 
running itself like a watch God made 
and God will see to winding it 
so you dont have to get up in the night 
saying you forgot to wind it— 

Hi bud— I give you the cosmos, the whole works— 
Freely I hand it to you to keep 
Freely you can hand it to whoever you think 
might want it to keep 
And now a few words from our sponsor 
He IS a rat, a louse, a lobscouse, 
a mismash slicker, 
a loudmouth liblab 


ENEMY NUMBER ONE 


“I WRITE for antiquity,” 
said a handsome mournful galoot 
thereby cancelling every last other one 
who might be saying, 

“I write for posterity,” 

as though antiquity was never postenty 

to its preceding antiquities 

and as though nevertheless 

our postenty will never be an antiquity 

to its successive posterities. 


642 


  


as though each posterity has not said 
to several precessive antiquities, 

''Kiss my posterior and forget about it ” 

He never had no fun, is that iP 
All around him animals 
eating each other, 
eating themselves, 

snarling slithering conniving animals 
Each citizen, except himself and his elite, 
nothing less than a heel 
No grand designs, no high hopes, no banners 
nor slogans nor shibboleths 
worth any man’s following 
You could summarize his row of books 
Humanity is a mess of eels and heels 
The human race is its own Enemy Number One 
For him the Family of Man stinks now 
and if you look back 
for him it always has stunk 


WORMS AND THE WIND 
Worms would rather be worms 

Ask a worm and he says, "Who knows what a worm knows^” 
Worms go down and up and over and under 
Worms like tunnels 

When worms talk they talk about the worm world 

Worms like it m the dark 

Neither the sun nor the moon interests a worm 

Zigzag worms hate circle worms 

Curve worms never trust square worms 

Worms know what worms want 

Slide worms are suspicious of crawl worms 

One worm asks another, "How does your belly drag today?” 

The shape of a crooked worm satisfies a crooked worm 

A straight worm says, "Why not be straight?” 

Worms tired of crawling begin to slither 

Long worms slither farther than short worms 

Middle-sized worms say, 'It is nice to be neither long nor short ” 


NEW SECTION 643 

Old worms teach young worms to say, “Don’t be sorry for me unless you 
have been a worm and lived m worm places and read worm books ” 
Wlien worms go to war they dig in, come out and fight, dig in again, 
come out and fight again, dig in again, and so on 
Worms underground never hear the wind overground and sometimes they 
ask, “What is this wind we hear of?” 


THE ABRACADABRA BOYS 

The abracadabra boys— have they been m the stacks and cloisters? Have 
they picked up languages for throwing into chow mem poems? 
Have they been to a sea of jargons and brought back jargons? Their salu- 
tations go Who Cometh? and. It ith I cometh 
They know postures from impostures, pistils from pustules, to hear them 
tell it They foregather and make pitty pat with each other m Latin 
and m their private pig Latin, very ofay 
They give with passwords “Who cometh?” “A kumquat cometh ” “And 
how cometh the kumquat?” “On an abbadabba, ancient and honor- 
able sire, ever and ever on an abbadabba ” 

Do they have fun? Sure— their fun is being what they are, like our fun 
IS being what we are— only they are more sorry for us being what we 
are than we are for them being what they are 
Pointing at you, at us, at the rabble, they sigh and say, these abracadabra 
boys, “They lack jargons They fail to distinguish between pustules 
and pistils They knoweth not how the kumquat cometh ” 


SHOES OF TRAVEL 

After overwhelming filth and amazing betrayals Odd Nansen looked at 
the concentration camp and was reminded of Norse folk-lore “What is 
the white layer in chicken dung?” “Oh, that’s chicken dung too ” This 
comes bitter as an Arabic, “The shadow of the hunchback? That too is 
hunched ” 

“I had no shoes, and I murmured, till I met a man who had no feet.” 
And what did they say? What words passed between the barefoot and the 
footless? If Barefoot spoke thanks with overmuch of pity did he get 
curses, laughter or silence from Footless? 



  


644 


“Look under your hat— it may tell you something ” The Armenians pass 
this along and further allege, “A man from hell is not afraid of hot ashes ” 
And what woman of them weaving a shadowed tapestry first began asking, 
“What can the rose do m the sea or a violet before the fire^”? 

“A good heart always does a little extra ” The Chinese give it “The peo- 
ple’s heart is heaven’s will,” they have been saying for long, and “Cleanse 
your heart as you would cleanse a dish Vast chasms can be filled but the 
heart of man never Emptiness of a heart prepares it for good news The 
emptiness of a valley makes it yield an echo ” 

“When a Jew has a boil he has no onion and when he has an onion he 
has no boil ” The Jews tell it with laughter And somberly they say, “It 
will not be any lighter until it is first quite dark ” Yet why should the 
Swiss be saying, “Night, love, and women give wrong ideas”’ What then 
becomes of ten thousand poems written to night, to love, to women’ 

Freedom is everybody’s job Everybody is freedom’s job Jobs are every- 
body’s freedom When freedom shrieks everybody should listen And 
everybody should be free to do what’ Wlien freedom flits then what’ 
And should the question be asked continuously, oh constantly, like this 
“Who paid for my freedom and what the price and am I somehow 
beholden’”? 


TURN OF THE WHEEL 
They are old over there, older than we are 

They fathered our speech and mothered many a document we hold dear. 
We came from there m the seeds of our forefathers 
We are m debt to them, we owe them much 

Yet we came away from them because we wanted no more of what they 
held out to us. 

We are the same as they and yet not the same 

And m the turn of the wheel of time we shall not be the same nor shall 
they 

Never did the map of Europe stay put 
Wave on wave swept over it in change on change 
What one time belonged here in another time belonged there 
And the shift of the belongings had always a cost of strife and cunning 
This river once outs no longer is ours and those mountains once we owned 
we no longer own 


NEW SECTION 


645 


And there are plains and rich valleys we took back and lost again and won 
and once more lost 

Geography costs— why does the map of Europe never stay put^ 

Why do these cries go ringing so endless over land and its boundary 
claims, over who shall own land and make it pay^ 


MANY HANDLES 

Beware writing of freedom the idea is political 
Beware too writing of discipline there too is politics 
Be careful of abstractions they become bright moths 
When images come test them by trial and error let them vanish should 
they choose exits 

Would you accept a thesis m governance of the writing of poems^ 

Why not listen to these poets on how those ones fall into categories the 
same as eggs or potatoes^ 

Your personal choice has high validity and fidelity — for you Bruddah 
Bones— for you— alone— by yourself— in the dust— in the wing whirr 
of midges morning-born and noon-demised 
Light rose-candles and contemplate yourselves, gentlemen all— speak lofty 
praise of each other— form cliques or claques and wear mandarin 
queues taking your cues from each other— it has been done 
Let the cubes go by themselves in declarations they have the answers 
while likewise the globes foregather and rate the globes as having the 
finalities of the exquisite far-flung verities 
Have we not heard conversations between cube and globe and neither of 
them enjoying the shape of the other^ 

Has not the square stood up and publicly called the circle a sonofabitch 
because of animosities induced by the inevitable mutual contradic- 
tions of form^ 

Now the rats— there we may have something— the rats make war on all 
forms non-rat— wherefrom and howcome the endunng plasm of the 
rat— the ageless and timeless unity and fraternity of the rats^ 

Many the handles whereby to take hold, 

many the dishes to choose and eat therefrom, 

many the faces never chosen 

yet worn by many as though chosen 

as though saying, *This one on me my choice was '' 


646 


  


In the Dark Ages many there and then 
had fun and took love and made visions 
and listened when Voices came 
Then as now were the Unafraid 
Then as now, “What if I am dropped into levels 
of ambiguous dust and covered 
over and forgotten? Have I in my 
time taken worse?” 

Then as now, “What if I am poured into numbers 
of the multitudinous sea and sunk 
in massive swarming fathoms? Have 
I gone through this last year 
and the year before?” 

In either Dark Ages or Renascence have there 
been ever the Immeasurable Men, the Incalculable 
Women, their outlooks timeless? 

Of Rabelais, is it admissible he threw an excel- 
lent laughter and his flagons and ovens made 
him a name? 

Of Piers Plowman, is it permissible he made sad 
lovable songs out of stubborn land, straw and 
hoe-handles, barefoot folk treading dirt floors? 
Should it be the Dark Ages recur, will there be 
again the Immeasurable Men, the Incalculable 
Women? 


THE UNKNOWN WAR 

Be calm, collected, easy 

In the face of the next war to come, be calm 

In the faint light and smoke of the flash and the mushroom of the first 
bomb blast of the Third World War, keep your wits collected 
At the information to be given out, after the few days of the fast moving 
next war, take it easy, be calm and collected, and say to yourself. First 
things come first and after this world comes another 
Beware of the matters not to be spoken of 
Beware of such matters as must be spoken of. 

Watch your ears as to things heard often 
Watch your ears as to things seldom heard. 


NEW SECTION 


647 


Pick and choose of what comes to your ears 

Select and sift, believe or disbelieve 

And on stated occasions, feeling a little high, 

Believe perfectly in the completely unbelievable, 

Thus making, under the tilt and feel of your hat. 

Myths your own, miracles beheld of your eyes alone. 

“Introducing,” said a spieler, winking at a shill, “introducing Miss Nuclear 
Fission, a wild gal in her time and she’s gonna be wilder yet, and you 
notice I don’t dare touch her she’s that wild ” 

“Introducing,” said a spieler with a cock-eye at a shill, “introducing Mr 
Chain Reaction, her pal and dancing partner, a hairy brute, ten bil- 
lion gorillas in one and when he tickles you, what gives? Nothin— only 
you die laughin ” 

So what? So we must be calm, collected, easy, facing the next war. 

And we can remember the man sitting on a red hot stove as he sniffed the 
air, “Is something burning?” 

Or the Kansas farmer, “We asked the cyclone to go around our bam but 
it didn’t hear us ” 

Or we can turn to the Books and take a looksee and then take a cry or 
a laugh, as it pleases 

They say, do the Books Begin your war and it becomes something else 
than you saw before it began— it runs longer or shorter than planned, 
it comes out like nobody running it expected, ending with both sides 
saying, “We are surpnsed at what happened'” 

A Marshal of France spoke like a gambler flipping a card or throwing 
ivory cubes, saying as though he had finished what might he said 
“The controlling factor in war is the Unknown.” 

Wherefore we take a deep look into the unfathomable and come out with 
a fingerhold on wnggling deductions fished from a barrel of conniving 
and fmctifying eels 

The bombs of the next war, if they control, hold the Unknown blasts— 
the bactenal spreads of the next war, if they control, reek with the 
Unknown— the round-the-curve-of-the-earth guided missiles of the 
next war, should they control, will have the slide and hiss of the Un- 
known— the cosmic rays or light beams carrying a moonshine kiss of 
death, if and when they control, will have the mercy of the sudden 
Unknown 

We shall do the necessary 
We shall meet the mevitable 


648 


  


We shall be prepared 
We shall stand before the Unknown, 
aware of the controlling factor 
the controlling factor 
the controlling factor 

—the Unknown 


:sac. 


NOCTURN IV 

The claims of the sea, of the tide, move out 
The moon comes in with a claim its own 
Painters on the beach paint their claims 

The chains drip with smears of this mystery. 

The brushes chase the smear over canvas 
Preliminary sketches are baffled by claims 
The brass mist holds a long arm over the molten sea-moon gold, the 
changing sea-mist brass 

Tall sea winds come with their claims and make the picture something else 
again 

Memories of sea mist may be voices, faces, with melting brass lights gone 
before tall winds 


[1908] 




NEW SECTION 


649 


BRIM 

Bkim’s hammer hit a wheelbarrow, a sliver of iron sent itself through the 
lens of the eye into the eyeball 

Bnm in the white sheets wonders if he will lose an eye and if a wedding 
IS put off when a woman says a one-eyed man won’t do 

The doc says maybe the eye will last, the doc X-rays, goes in with a knife, 
holds the slit with wires, pulls the sliver out with a magnet, stitches the 
eyeball, and says a week later the eye is saved 

Brim knows now the wedding comes off, among the white sheets with one 
eye dark he knows his sweetheart will not face a one-eyed man at the 
breakfasts of life’s years 

A month, the doc knows the eye is lost, the doc is thinking, it is not so 
easy to tell a man one eye is lost, still more it is not so easy to tell a man 
what must be told again to a woman who wonders whether it will pay 
her to have a one-eyed man to eat breakfast with all along life’s years 

Bnm is in the white sheets thinking, the doc is m his ofEce thinking, the 
woman . the woman 


[1928] 


FRANgOIS VILLON FORGOTTEN 

The women of the city where I was forgotten. 

The dark-eyed women who forgot me heard me singing 
And it helped them the more to be forgetting 
And I sang and sang on helping them to forget 
In the city where I sang to be forgotten 

I slept with a woman ten men had forgotten 
She said I’d forget her and she’d forget me 
She said the two of us could sing one song 
On how bitter yesterday was 
And another on tomorrow more bitter yet. 

The two of us sang these songs 


650 


  


Five women said they would forget me. 

Since I sang with a heart half-broken, 

Since I sang like a man expecting nothing 
Five women have forgotten me 
Ask them and they answer 
He’s dim as mist to remember 
and oh he’s long gone 

[1920] 


BROKEN SONNET 

May the weather next week be good to us 
The strong fighting birds, so often ugly, 
Jab the songsters and bleed them 
And send them away, the wranglers mle. 
The fast breeders, the winter sparrows. 

The crows The weeds, the quack grass, 
The tough wire-grass, they have it all 
Their way May the weather next week 
Be good to us 

[1920] 


THE HAMMER 

I HAVE seen 

The old gods go 

And the new gods come 

Day by day 
And year by year 
The idols fall 
And the idols nse 

Today 

I worship the hammer. 

[1910] 


NEW SECTION 


651 


HAMMERS POUNDING 

Grant had a sledgehammer pounding and pounding and Lee had a sledge- 
hammer pounding and pounding 

And the two hammers gnashed their ends against each other and broke 
holes and splintered and withered 

And nobody knew how the war would end and everybody prayed God his 
hammer would last longer than the other hammer 

Because the whole war hung on the big guess of who had the hardest 
hammer 

And m the end one side won the war because it had a harder hammer than 
the other side 

Give us a hard enough hammer, a long enough hammer, and we will 
break any nation. 

Crush any star you name or smash the sun and the moon into small 
flinders 

[19^5] 


SEE THE TREES 

See the trees lean to the wind’s way of learning 
See the dirt of the hills shape to the water’s way of learning 
See the lift of it all go the way the biggest wind and the strongest water 
want it 

[1928] 


THE WIND ON THE WAY 

Every day is the last day 
I have waited for tomorrow 
And it has never come 

A wash of sand on the beaches 
And we handle it soft and write 
Our names on it 

'The sand goes out, comes in. 

And there is no tomorrow, no yesterday 
Everything is now 



652 


  


I have heard sopranos m great cathedrals 
Sing these high and low spokes of light 

And I have heard lonesome accordion players 
Ring the changes on it hi-hi and lodo 

Every day is the last day 

Tomorrow is the wind on the way 

[1920] 


ALOOF 

Fire of winter sunset, 

Your talk is red and gold 

In smoldering shadow. 

Monolog of day and night 
between sun and stars, 

You are an old man 

who chooses few words. 

[19^3] 


DUST 

Here is dust remembers it was a rose 
one time and lay m a woman's hair 
Here is dust remembers it was a woman 
one time and m her hair lay a rose 
Oh things one time dust, what else now is it 
you dream and remember of old days? 

[1913] 


NEW SECTION 


653 


e 


2 . 


SWEEPING WENDY STUDY IN FUGUE 

Wendy put her black eyes on me 
and swept me with her black eyes — 
sweep on sweep she swept me 
Have you ever seen Wendy? 

Have you ever seen her sweep 
Keeping her black eyes on you 
keeping you eyeswept? 


PAPER I 

Paper is two kinds, to write on, to wrap with 

If you like to write, you write 

If you like to wrap, you wrap 

Some papers like writers, some like wrappers 

Are you a writer or a wrapper? 


PAPER II 

I WRITE what I know on one side of the paper 
and what I don't know on the other 

Fire likes dry paper and wet paper laughs at 
fire 

Empty paper sacks say, “Put something in me, 
what are we waiting for?” 

Paper sacks packed to the limit say, “We hope 
we don't bust '' 

Paper people like to meet other paper people 


654 


  


DOORS 

An open door says, “Come in ” 

A shut door says, “Who are you?” 

Shadows and ghosts go through shut doors 

If a door is shut and you want it shut, 
why open it? 

If a door is open and you want it open, 
why shut it? 

Doors forget but only doors know what it is 
doors forget 


BOXES AND BAGS 

The bigger the box the more it holds 
Empty boxes hold the same as empty heads 

Enough small empty boxes thrown into a big empty box fill it full 
A half-empty box says, “Put more in ” 

A big enough box could hold the world 

Elephants need big boxes to hold a dozen elephant handkerchiefs 
Fleas fold little handkerchiefs and fix them nice and neat in flea handker- 
chief-boxes 

Bags lean against each other and boxes stand independent 
Boxes are square with comers unless round with circles 
Box can be piled on box till the whole works comes tumbling 
Pile box on box and the bottom box says, “If you will kindly take notice 
you will see it all rests on me ” 

Pile box on box and the top one says, “Who falls farthest if or when we 
fall? I ask you ” 

Box people go looking for boxes and bag people go looking for bags 


WE MUST BE POLITE 

(Lessons for children on how to behave under peculiar circumstances) 


Ip we meet a gorilla 
what shall we do? 


1 


NEW SECTION 


655 


Two things we may do 
if we so wish to do 

Speak to the gorilla, 
very, very respectfully, 

"How do you do, sir?” 

Or, speak to him with less 
distinction of manner, 

"Hey, why don’t you go back 
where you came from?” 

2 

If an elephant knocks on your door 
and asks for something to eat, 
there are two things to say 

Tell him there are nothing but cold 
victuals in the house and he will do 
better next door 

Or say We have nothing but six bushels 
of potatoes— will that be enough for 
your breakfast, sir? 


ARITHMETIC 

Arithmetic is where numbers fly like pigeons in and out of your head 

Arithmetic tells you how many you lose or win if you know how many you 
had before you lost or won 

Arithmetic is seven eleven all good children go to heaven— or five six 
bundle of sticks 

Arithmetic is numbers you squeeze from your head to your hand to your 
pencil to your paper till you get the answer 

Anthmetic is where the answer is right and ever5d;hing is nice and you can 
look out of the window and see the blue sky— or the answer is wrong 
and you have to start all over and try again and see how it comes out 
this time 

If you take a number and double it and double it again and then double 
It a few more times, the number gets bigger and bigger and goes 


656 


  


higher and higher and only arithmetic can tell you what the number 
IS when you decide to quit doubling 

Arithmetic is where you have to multiply— -and you carry the multiplica- 
tion table in your head and hope you won't lose it 

If you have two animal crackers, one good and one bad, and you eat one 
and a striped zebra with streaks all over him eats the other, how many 
animal crackers will you have if somebody ofiers you five six seven 
and you say No no no and you say Nay nay nay and you say Nix 
nix nix^ 

If you ask your mother for one fried egg for breakfast and she gives you 
two fried eggs and you eat both of them, who is better in arithmetic, 
you or your mother^ 


LITTLE GIRL, BE CAREFUL WHAT YOU SAY 

Little girl, be careful what you say 
when you make talk with words, words— 
for words are made of syllables 
and syllables, child, are made of air— 
and air is so thin— air is the breath of God- 
air IS finer than fire or mist, 
finer than water or moonlight, 
finer than spider-webs m the moon, 
finer than water-flowers m the morning; 
and words are strong, too, 
stronger than rocks or steel 
stronger than potatoes, com, fish, cattle, 
and soft, too, soft as little pigeon-eggs, 
soft as the music of hummingbird wings 
So, little girl, when you speak greetings, 
when you tell ]okes, make wishes or prayers, 
be careful, be careless, be careful, 
be what you wish to be 


NEW SECTION 


657 


3. sty Talk 


SKY TALK 

Wool white horses and their heads sag and roll. 

Snow white sheep and their tails drag far, 

Impossible animals ever more impossible— 

They walk on the sky to say How do you do^ 

Or Good-by or Back-soon-maybe 

Or would you say any white flowers come 
more lovely than certain white clouds^ 

Or would you say any tall mountains beckon, 
rise and beckon beyond certain tall walking clouds^ 

Is there any roll of white sea-horses equal to 
the sky-horse white of certain clouds rolling^ 

Now we may summon buyers and sellers 
and tell them go buy certain clouds today, 
go sell other clouds tomorrow, 
and we may hear them report 
Ups and downs, brisk buying, brisk selling. 

Market unsteady, never so many fluctuations 

Can there be any veering white fluctuations, 
any moving incalculable fluctuations 
quite so incalculable as certain clouds? 

^Voices] 


RIDDLES AND WHIMS 
(for Lloyd and Kathryn Lewis) 

What flies forever and rests never? The Wind So say Senegalese Maybe 
they know Forever is a long time--it is beyond time And it rests never? 
Could be ril work on it 


658 


  


Who are the comrades that always fight, and never hurt each other? The 
Teeth Here are the Senegalese again I let ’em have it 

What runs faster than a horse, crosses water, and is not wet? The Sun 
This is the French or, you might say. Early Frog 

WTiat man stands between two ravenous fishes? The tongue between the 
teeth Samoans tell that one— a puppet play for chillern 

Twenty brothers, each with a hat on his head, who are they? Fingers and 
toes, with nails for hats Samoans again I like Samoans 

The Insh farmer’s wife in Derry, after he died she killed his horse To the 
wailing landlord she cried, “Would ye have my man go about on foot in 
the next world?” I like her She believed That next world was real to her 

Wabash Avenue, a cold winter night, and an old Irishwoman selling pink- 
sheet newspapers reporting on ponies m Florida that afternoon As she 
handed me a paper for my two cents she wished me to know, “My hat 
was on every horse'” This idea warmed her Down the home stretch came 
the pounding hoofs And on every horse she had a hat I like her too 


BRIGHT CONVERSATION WITH SAINT-EX 

1 

There is a desperate loveliness to be seen 
m certain flowers and bright weeds on certain planets 
With the weeds I have held long conversations 
and I found them intelligent 
even though desperate and lovely 
The flowers however met me shortspoken 
“Yes” and “No” and “Why?” were their favonte words 
And they had other slow monosyllables 
They seemed even to have practiced their monosyllables 
They seemed to find it more difficult 
Than the gaudy garrulous bnght weeds 

to be intelligent, desperate and lovely 
Take a far journey now, my friend, to certain planets 



NEW SECTION 


659 


Meet then certain flowers and bright weeds and ask them 
What are the dark winding roots of their desperate loveliness 
See whether you bring back the same report as mine 
See whether certain long conversations 

and certain slow practiced monosyllables 
haunt you and keep coming back to haunt you 
For myself, my friend, I have come to believe on certain planets 

anything can happen 


2 

There was a ring of gold 
kept its circle around the moon 
five hours one Tuesday night 
When the ring went away 
it was gone in an eyebhnk 
and the moon stood alone 
And I folded away in a little album 
a pattern of moving gold haze 
ready to fade in an eyebhnk 

3 

When the smoke of the clouds parted 
there came on the night blue of sky 
the brighter blue of a little star 
tremulous with hazards of travel 
And why should I have been saying, 

'*Go forth, little star 
Be not afraid, small traveller 
Remember it holds importance 
for you to be what you are 
and be seen where you are 
by random gazers like me^^*^ 

And I am asking why I should tell a star 
to go on being a star. 


66o 


  


MEADOW IN SUMMER 

The north summer wind swept the hay 
The hay bowed howdy to the sun 
The long hay meadow ran a flag of brown 
To the skyline blue, a light sweet blue 
Buy me a shirt of blue like that 
Bury my daughters in blue like that 

[Voices] 


GUARANTEED ANTIQUE 

Life is just a bowl of cherries 
Death is a kiss and an ashtray 

Suppose Judas Iscanot 
had written Mary Magdalene 
love you, I love you 
Would Mary have answered 
'Tou you? Since when?” 

Life is just a bowl of cherries 
Death is a kiss and an ashtray 

[Voices] 


YOU SHALL HA\^ HOMES 

These are the fields I called for 
These are the miles of the long night beginning. 
These are the open ways of summer corn 
These are the grass and the moon changing 
Let the riddles of the yellow harvest come 

You shall have homes 
out and away m the blue misL 
off and gone in the gray haze, 
you shall have homes 


NEW SECTION 


66l 


Go, birds, eat the last of the corn 
Pick it up now in the harvest clean-ups 
Then go, birds 

The time of the gardens is come, 

The time of the bold last blazes. 

The time of the old slow burnings 
Name over their names, bees, goldenrods, 
Blues so much deeper than the earlier blues, 
Yellows running out changes of yellow. 
Purple putting out new strips of purple 
The crisp of a weaving, dropping time is here 

You shall have homes 
Out and away, off and gone, 

In a blue mist, in a gray haze— 
You shall all have homes. 

[1920] 


TWO MOON FANTASIES 
1 

She bade the moon stand stall 
And the moon stood stall for her, 

At her request came to a stillstand 
“I am m love,” she was saying 
She reached up with a single finger. 
Pushed the moon with one little finger 
And put the moon where she wanted it. 
“I am m love,” she was saying 
On a later day, far later. 

She found her magic lacking 
The moon was the same 
And her one finger the same 
Yet nothing happened 
And her laughter rang glad as she cried 
“It was a good tnck while it lasted ” 


662 


  


2 

The moon is a bucket of suds 

yellow and smooth suds 

The horses of the moon dip their heads 

into this bucket and drink 

The cats of the moon, the dogs, the rats, 

they too go to this bucket for dunk 

Thus an apparition told it 

To him the moon meant drink and drinkers 

The moon is a disc of hidden books 

Reach an arm into it 

and feel around with your hands 

and you bring out books already written 

and many books yet to be written 

for the moon holds past, present, future 

Thus an apparition related the matter 

To him the disc meant pnnt and printers 


DROWSY 

Sleep is the gift of many spiders 
The webs tie down the sleepers easy 


OUR HELLS 

MmxoN unlocked hell for us 
and let us have a look 
Dante did the same 
Each of these hells is speaal 
One IS Milton’s, one Dante’s 
Milton put in all that for him 
was hell on earth 
Dante put in all that for him 
was hell on earth 

If you unlock your hell for me 
And I unlock my hdl for you 


NEW SECTION 


563 


They will be two special hells, 
Each of us showing what for us 
IS hell on earth 

Yours IS one hell, mine another 


THIS STREET NEVER SLEEPS 
At the comer 

of Forty-second and Broadway 
it IS feet and wheels 
wheels and feet 
far in the morning 

“Let us give Tomorrow nothing,” 

IS the cry down under 

“What has Tomonow done for us?” 

IS the asking, 

feet and wheels 

wheels and feet 

far m the morning 

There is a Fool sleeps 

at Forty-second and Broadway 

He knows so little 

He knows almost nothing 

He knows only the Wilderness waits 

He knows the Wilderness comes 

feet and wheels 

wheels and feet 

far m the morning 

at Forty-second and Broadway 


NEW SONG FOR INDIANA OPHELIAS 

Twist your fingers, cheery 
Hum-ho on a jig m your head 

Hum-ho fee-fi-fo and a ram-tum-tiddle-dee-oo Twist your apron, cheery. 



664 


  


Whistle what the fiddler hissed when he rosined the bow It’s hell on the 
Wabash in blossom time 

So wash the dishes, so pick up the room, put a thomapple branch in a 
pitcher of water, listen twice to the bobwhite call 

So go on singing hum-ho tiddle-de-00, twist your fingers in your apron, 
cheery 

Sing, “Blossoms O blossoms lay my head in tub of blossoms, bring me an 
arm of blossoms, take ’em away, they kill me— No nah nah nah, 
bnng me back blossoms, lay my head in a tub of blossoms ” 

[1922] 


MOONLIGHT AND MAGGOTS 

The moonlight filters on the prairie 
The land takes back an old companion 
The young corn seems pleased with a visit 
In Illinois, in Iowa, this moontime is on 
A bongo looks out and talks about the look of the moon 
As if always a bongo must talk somewhat so in moontime— 

The moon is a milk-white love promise, 

A present for the young corn to lemembcr, 

A caress for silk-brown tassels to come 

Spring moon to autumn moon measures one harvest. 

All almanacs are merely so many moon numbers 
A house dizzy with decimal points and trick figures 
And a belfry at the top of the world for sleep songs 
And a home for lonesome goats to go to— 

Like now, like always, the bongo takes up a moon theme— 

There is no end to the ancient kit-kats inhabiting the moon* 

Jack and the beanstalk and Jacobs ladder helped them up, 

Cats and sheep, the albatross, the phoenix and the dodo-bird, 
They are all living on the moon for the sake of the bongo— 
Castles on the moon, mansions, shacks and shanties, ramshackle 
Huts of tarpaper and tmcans, grand real estate properties 
Where magnificent rats eat tunnels in colossal cheeses, 

Where the rainbow chasers take the seven prisms apart 
And put them together again and are paid in moon money— 
The flying dutchman, paul bunyan, saint paul, )ohn bunyan, 



NEW SECTION 


665 


The little jackass who coughs gold pieces when you say hricklebnt— 
They are all there on the moon and the rent not paid 
And the roof leaking and the taxes delinquent— 

Like now, like always, the bongo jabbers of the moon. 

Of cowsheds, railroad tracks, com rows and cornfield comers 
Finding the filter of the moon an old friend— 

Look at it— cnes the bongo— have a looki have a look' 

Well, what of it? comes the poohpooh— 

Always the bongo is a little loony— comes the poohpooh. 

The bongo is a poor fish and a long ways from home 
Be like me, be an egg, a hardboiled egg, a pachyderm 
Practical as a buzzsaw and a hippopotamus put together 
Get the facts and no monkeybusiness what I mean 
The moon is a dead cinder, a ball of death, a globe of doom 
Long ago it died of lost motion, maggots masticated the surface of it 
And the maggots languished, turned ice, froze on and took a free ride 
Now the sun shines on the maggots and the maggots make the moonlight 
The moon is a cadaver and a dusty mummy and a damned rotten invest- 
ment 

The moon is a liability loaded up with frozen assets and worthless paper 
Only the lamb, the sucker, the come-on, the little lost boy, has time for 
the moon 

Well— says the bongo— you got a good argument 
I am a little lost boy and a long ways from home 
I am a sap, a pathetic fish, a nitwit and a lot more and worse you couldn’t 
think of 

Nevertheless and notwithstanding and letting all you say be granted and 
acknowledged 

The moon is a silver silhouette and a singing stalactite 
The moon is a bringer of fool’s gold and fine phantoms 
On the heaving restless sea or the fixed and fastened land 
The moon is a friend for the lonesome to talk with 
The moon is at once easy and costly, cheap and priceless 
The price of the moon runs beyond all adding machine numbers 
Summer moonmusic drops down adagio sostenuto whathaveyou 
Winter moonmusic practices the mind of man for a long tnp 
The pnce of the moon is an orange and a few kind words. 


666 


  


Nobody on the moon says, I been thrown out of better places than this 
No one on the moon has ever died of arithmetic and hard words 
No one on the moon would skin a louse to sell the hide 
The moon is a pocket luckpiece for circus riders, for acrobats on the flying 
rings, for wild animal tamers 
I can look up at the moon and take it or leave it 
The moon coaxes me Be at home wherever you are 
I can let the moon laugh me to sleep for nothing 
I can put a piece of the moon in my pocket for tomorrow 
I can holler my name at the moon and the moon hollers back my name 
When I get confidential with the moon and tell secrets 
The moon is a sphinx and a repository under oath 

Yes Mister poohpooh 

I am a poor nut, )ust another of God’s mistakes 

You are a tough bimbo, hard as nails, yeah 

You know enough to come in when it rains 

You know the way to the post office and I have to ask 

They might fool you the first time but never the second 

Thrown into the nver you always come up with a fish 

You are a diller a dollar, I am a ten o’clock scholar 

You know the portent of the axiom Them as has gits 

You devised that abracadabra Get all you can keep all you get 

We shall always be interfering with each other, forever be arguing— 
you for the maggots, me for the moon 
Over our bones, cleaned by the final maggots as we he recumbent, per- 
fectly forgetful, beautifully ignorant— 

There will settle over our grave illustrious tombs 

On nights when the air is clear as a bell 

And the dust and fog are shovelled off on the wind — 

There will sink over our empty epitaphs 

a shiver of moonshafts 
a line of moonslants 


SPECIAL STARLIGHT 

The Creator of night and of birth 
was the Maker of the stars. 



NEW SECTION 


667 


Shall we look up now at stars in Winter 
And call them always sweeter friends 
Because this story of a Mother and a Child 
Never is told with the stars left out? 

Is it a Holy Night now when a child issues 
Out of the dark and the unknown 
Into the starlight? 

Down a Winter evening sky 
when a woman hovers 
between two great doorways, 
between entry and exit^ 
between pain to be laughed at, 
joy to be wept over- 
do the silver-white lines 
then come from holy stars? 
shall the Newcomer, the Newborn, 
be given soft flannels, 
swaddling-cloths called Holy? 

Shall all wanderers over the earth, all homeless ones. 
All against whom doors are shut and words spoken— 
Shall these find the earth less strange tonight? 

Shall they hear news, a whisper on the night wind? 

“A Child is born ” “The meek shall inhent the earth ” 

“And they crucified Him they spat upon Hun. 

And He rose from the dead ” 

Shall a quiet dome of stars high over 
Make signs and a fnendly language 
Among all nations? 

Shall they yet gather with no clenched fists at all, 

And look into each other’s faces and see eye to eye. 
And find ever new testaments of man as a sojourner 
And a toiler and a brother of fresh understandings? 


Shall there be now always 
believers and more believers 



668 


  


of sunset and moonnse, 
of moonset and dawn, 
of wheeling numbers of stars, 
and wheels within wheels^ 

Shall plain habitations off the well-known roads 
Count now for a little more than they used to^ 

Shall plain ways and people held close to earth 
Be reckoned among things to be written about^ 

Shall tumult, grandeur, fanfare, panoply, prepared loud noises 
Stand equal to a quiet heart, thoughts, vast dreams 
Of men conquering the earth by conquering themselves^ 

Is there a time for ancient genius of man 

To be set for comparison with the latest generations^ 

Is there a time for stripping to simple, childish questions^ 

On a Holy Night we may say 
The Cieator of night and of birth 
was the Maker of the stars 


THE PRESS IS PECULIAR 

The morning newspaper is useful, 
Likewise the evening pink sheet 
For the service of these anonymous 
Hopefuls who go forth and seek 
The reward from whosoever 
May be so good as to hand them. 
Any anonymous one of them. 

The boon and bestowal of a job 
First of all the newspaper 
Passed the time for them. 

Told them of dead and living fools, 
Of follies and enterprises. 

Of men dead as doornails. 

Of women soft as pity and mist, 

Of bank wrecks, wage cuts. 


NEW SECTION 


669 


Tomatoes, potatoes, cheaper. 

Better times ahead 
Just around the comer 
Happy days here again, 

Headlines, want ads, comic strips, 
Kaleidoscopic phantasmagoria— 

It passed the time for them 
And when night came with mercy. 

Night and the sleep time of proud man. 
Either on a crummy flophouse floor 
Or else on the chilly park grass. 

They had a bed and a blanket to order, 
The morning paper, the evening pmk sheet 
It is neither a boast nor a conjecture 
The press is peculiar 
The press serves the public 

U933] 


GLASS HOUSE CANTICLE 

Bless Thee, O Lord, for the living arc of the sky over me this morning 

Bless Thee, O Lord, for the companionship of night mist far above the 
skyscraper peaks I saw when I woke once during the night 

Bless Thee, O Lord, for the miracle of light to my eyes and the mystery 
of it ever changing 

Bless Thee, O Lord, for the laws Thou hast ordained holding fast these 
tall oblongs of stone and steel, holding fast the planet Earth in its 
course and farther beyond the cycle of the Sun 


SWELL PEOPLE 

There will always be monkeys and peacocks, 

The monkeys for melancholy, the peacocks for pride, 
The monkeys for chatter and crying out loud, 


670 


  


The peacocks for showing their tails and a fan of feathers 
Either they will be at your door soon 
Or you will meet them the next time you travel 
Who can get away from them? 

And they always say they are well met 


PUBLIC LETTER TO EMILY DICKINSON 

Five little roses spoke 
for God to be near them, 
for God to be witness 

Flame and thorn were there 
in and around five roses, 
winding flame, speaking thorn. 

Pour from the sea 
one hand of salt 
Take from a star 
one finger of mist 
Pick from a heart 
one cry of silver 

Let be, give over 
to the moving blue 
of the chosen shadow. 

Let be, give over 
to the ease of gongs, 
to the might of gongs 

Share with the flamewon, 
choose from your thorns, 
for God to be near you, 
for God to be witness 


NEW SECTION 


671 


SCRIPTURE 

Willie Henderson, Massachusetts-bom, painted and dreamed in Chi- 
cago, ending in The City of the Holy Faith of Francis of Assisi, on 
the maps written as Santa F4 

Where Willie paints, dreams, whistles, and sings ofiEkey, where Willie on 
a day meets Alfonzo and the father of Alfonzo 
“It IS a hard year, let me pay you for the alfalfa you let me feed my pony,” 
said Willie to the father of Alfonzo at the pueblo of San Ildefonso 
“We have it together now,” said the father of Alfonzo, “and when it is 
gone we go without it together,” said the father of Alfonzo 

[^925] 


WALL SHADOWS 

These walls they knew those shadows 
Who moved then as shadows holding bones. 

Lights and tongues spread over bones 

Now with those shadows gone from these walls 

Do these walls ever say, “When we try, we can remember those shadows”? 


ONE MODERN POET 

Having heard the instraction 
“Be thou no swine,” 

He belabored himself and wrote 
“Beware of the semblance 
of lard at thy flanks ” 


LIGHT AND MOONBELLS 

They could bend low 
and be to each other 
a blue beam of molten light 

They wrought together keepsakes 
thin as the air of five moonbells 


672 


  


CORNUCOPIA 

The naked cornucopia of autumn fields 
bids us look for the harvest moon 
and many buttons of green become gold, 
tawny spun mist of haze hung hither 
and many leaves blown thither, shaken, 
change on change of russet and umber, 
floats foretelling snow maybe soon, 
in huts of thought, in witness rooms, 
snowfalls, long white snowfalls often 


LITTLE CANDLE 

Light may be had for nothing 
or the low cost of looking, seeing, 
and the secrets of light come high 
Light knows more than it tells 
Does it happen the sun, the moon 
choose to be dazzling, baffling^ 

They do demand deep loyal communions 
So do the angles of moving stars 
So do the seven sprays of the rainbow 
So does any little candle 
speaking for itself in its personal corner 


MOMENTS OF DAWN RIDERS 

Those who straddle foaming sea-horses and ride into the sunrise 

do so with no instrument board, no timetables 

Those who watch one rainbow after another dissolve m seven prisms 

they seem to gather reputations for being rainbow chasers— 

they also choose bright mornings of clear weather and fading daystars 

to study the organization of the sprockets of the bursting dawn 

They go out of their way to contemplate either a forty-eight-hour blizzard 

or a short light snowfall and the bigger the flakes the shorter— 


NEW SECTION 


673 


and the slow shadows of a summer moondown they wouldn't try to make 
over 

nor any significant bushels of potatoes nor baskets of corn running over 

nor poignant orchids ready to perish at a wrong breath or accent 

nor any single scarlet moss-rose piteous m a wild ramdrench 

nor a boy of brown hair and eyes at Saipan, ''It's hard to go/' 

nor a blue-eyed boy at Arnhem with a wry smile, "Good-by chum this 

IS It/' 


CROSSED NUMBERS 

Delphiniums are bom 
and why is a why 
and when is a when 

Folded and kept for unfolding 
one in a series of leaves 
moves in a cunning of numbers 
and numbers are never and now 
and why is a why 

One is a two is a number 
Join them and cross them 
and see them be numbers 
be numbers beyond numbers 

Toss them in wanton spirals 
Weave them in grave communions 
Frame them with lighted eyelashes 
Let them have opening closing lips 
The wind is a when and a how 
and a giver of laughing numbers 
and a thrower of crying numbers 

One delphinium by itself 
IS a who and a who 
A Stalk of blue from a weaving earth 
A sheaf skyblue from a waltzing sun 
And one is a two is a number 
And a spoke of light is a why 
And one yes one is a who and a who 

[UMPAWAUG FARM, Connecticut^ ^933] 


  


674 


NIGHT BELLS 

Two bells SIX bells two bells six bells 

On a blue pavilion 

Out across a smooth blue pavilion 

And between each bell 

One clear cry of a woman 

“Lord God you made the night too long too long ” 


HARMONICA HUMDRUMS 

And so the days pass 
and so we drift and dawdle 
Bright stood the mountains, 
brighter loomed the sea 
And so the nights go on 
and so we flash and fade. 

Green lay the hills, 
greener a river evening 
Stones wore gray lichen 
and trees a morn mist 
And so the gold be gone 
And so the harm be ashes 
First moved the moonrise 
Later dropped the moondown 
Handy shoved the dawn 
Handydandy shone the sun. 

  


CHANGING LIGHT WINDS 

Changing light winds 
blew over the sea, 
came blue, came gold, 
came silver with spray, 
came white in dreamsnow 
With long foam feathers. 


NEW SECTION 


675 


long sleepy snowfalls, 
then gray over the flats 
an overcast of monotone- 
night and stars a while 
then night and no stars 


NUMBER MAN 

(for the ghost of Johann Sebastian Bach) 
He was bom to wonder about numbers. 

He balanced fives against tens 
and made them sleep together 
and love each other 

He took sixes and sevens 

and set them wrangling and fighting 

over raw bones 

He woke up twos and fours 

out of baby sleep 

and touched them back to sleep 

He managed eights and nines, 

gave them prophet beards, 

marched them into mists and mountains 

He added all the numbers he knew, 
multiplied them by new-found numbers 
and called it a prayer of Numbers 

For each of a million cipher silences 
he dug up a mate number 
for a candle light m the dark 


He knew love numbers, luck numbers. 

how the sea and the stars 

are made and held by numbers 


676 


  


He died from the wonder of numbering 
He said good-by as if good-by is a number 

  


ANYWHERE AND EVERYWHERE PEOPLE 

There are people so near nothing 

they are everywhere without being seen 
There are people so eager to be seen 
they nearly always manage to be seen 
There are people who want to be everywhere at once 
and they seem to get nowhere 
There are people who have never been anywhere 
and they are less anxious about it than those 
who have been eveiywhere 
Could it be there are people so near to nothing 
they might be so humble as to say, 'We go 
everywhere without being seen and it comes 
right easy on us'"^ 

Could it be there are people who have never been seen 
anywhere and they ask people who have been seen 
everywhere, "How does it feel to be seen everywhere^'' 








THE LATE SINGER


  Here it is spring again
  and I still a young man!
  I am late at my singing.
  The sparrow with the black rain on his breast
  has been at his cadenzas for two weeks past:
  What is it that is dragging at my heart?
  The grass by the back door
  is stiff with sap.
  The old maples are opening
  their branches of brown and yellow moth-flowers.
  A moon hangs in the blue
  in the early afternoons over the marshes.
  I am late at my singing.




MARCH


I

  Winter is long in this climate
  and spring--a matter of a few days
  only,--a flower or two picked
  from mud or from among wet leaves
  or at best against treacherous
  bitterness of wind, and sky shining
  teasingly, then closing in black
  and sudden, with fierce jaws.


II

  March,
        you remind me of
  the pyramids, our pyramids--
  stript of the polished stone
  that used to guard them!
                           March,
  you are like Fra Angelico
  at Fiesole, painting on plaster!

  March,
        you are like a band of
  young poets that have not learned
  the blessedness of warmth
  (or have forgotten it).

  At any rate--
  I am moved to write poetry
  for the warmth there is in it
  and for the loneliness--
  a poem that shall have you
          in it March.


III

  See!
       Ashur-ban-i-pal,
  the archer king, on horse-back,
  in blue and yellow enamel!
  with drawn bow--facing lions
  standing on their hind legs,
  fangs bared! his shafts
  bristling in their necks!

  Sacred bulls--dragons
  in embossed brickwork
  marching--in four tiers--
  along the sacred way to
  Nebuchadnezzar's throne hall!
  They shine in the sun,
  they that have been marching--
  marching under the dust of
  ten thousand dirt years.

  Now--
  they are coming into bloom again!
  See them!
  marching still, bared by
  the storms from my calendar
  --winds that blow back the sand!
  winds that enfilade dirt!
  winds that by strange craft
  have whipt up a black army
  that by pick and shovel
  bare a procession to
                      the god, Marduk!

  Natives cursing and digging
  for pay unearth dragons with
  upright tails and sacred bulls
  alternately--
               in four tiers--
  lining the way to an old altar!
  Natives digging at old walls--
  digging me warmth--digging me
        sweet loneliness--
  high enamelled walls.


IV

  My second spring--
  passed in a monastery
  with plaster walls--in Fiesole
  on the hill above Florence.

  My second spring--painted
  a virgin--in a blue aureole
  sitting on a three-legged stool,
  arms crossed--
  she is intently serious,
                          and still
  watching an angel
  with coloured wings
  half kneeling before her--
  and smiling--the angel's eyes
  holding the eyes of Mary
  as a snake's holds a bird's.
  On the ground there are flowers,
  trees are in leaf.


V

  But! now for the battle!
  Now for murder--now for the real thing!
  My third springtime is approaching!
  Winds!
  lean, serious as a virgin,
  seeking, seeking the flowers of March.

  Seeking
  flowers nowhere to be found,
  they twine among the bare branches
  in insatiable eagerness--
  they whirl up the snow
  seeking under it--
  they--the winds--snakelike
  roar among yellow reeds
  seeking flowers--flowers.

  I spring among them
  seeking one flower
  in which to warm myself!

  I deride with all the ridicule
  of misery--
  my own starved misery.

  Counter-cutting winds
        strike against me
  refreshing their fury!

  Come, good, cold fellows!
        Have we no flowers?
  Defy then with even more
  desperation than ever--being
        lean and frozen!

  But though you are lean and frozen--
  think of the blue bulls of Babylon.

  Fling yourselves upon
         their empty roses--
                cut savagely!

  But--
  think of the painted monastery
         at Fiesole.




BERKET AND THE STARS


  A day on the boulevards chosen out of ten years of
  student poverty! One best day out of ten good ones.
  Berket in high spirits--"Ha, oranges! Let's have one!"
  And he made to snatch an orange from the vender's cart.

  Now so clever was the deception, so nicely timed
  to the full sweep of certain wave summits,
  that the rumor of the thing has come down through
  three generations--which is relatively forever!




A CELEBRATION


  A middle-northern March, now as always--
  gusts from the south broken against cold winds--
  but from under, as if a slow hand lifted a tide,
  it moves--not into April--into a second March,
  the old skin of wind-clear scales dropping
  upon the mould: this is the shadow projects the tree
  upward causing the sun to shine in his sphere.

  So we will put on our pink felt hat--new last year!
  --newer this by virtue of brown eyes turning back
  the seasons--and let us walk to the orchid-house,
  see the flowers will take the prize to-morrow
  at the Palace.
                Stop here, these are our oleanders.
  When they are in bloom--
                          You would waste words
  It is clearer to me than if the pink
  were on the branch. It would be a searching in
  a coloured cloud to reveal that which now, huskless,
  shows the very reason for their being.

  And these the orange-trees, in blossom--no need
  to tell with this weight of perfume in the air.
  If it were not so dark in this shed one could better
  see the white.
                It is that very perfume
  has drawn the darkness down among the leaves.
  Do I speak clearly enough?
  It is this darkness reveals that which darkness alone
  loosens and sets spinning on waxen wings--
  not the touch of a finger-tip, not the motion
  of a sigh. A too heavy sweetness proves
  its own caretaker.
  And here are the orchids!
                           Never having seen
  such gaiety I will read these flowers for you:
  This is an odd January, died--in Villon's time.
  Snow, this is and this the stain of a violet
  grew in that place the spring that foresaw its own doom.

  And this, a certain July from Iceland:
  a young woman of that place
  breathed it toward the south. It took root there.
  The colour ran true but the plant is small.

  This falling spray of snowflakes is
  a handful of dead Februarys
  prayed into flower by Rafael Arevalo Martinez
  of Guatemala.
                Here's that old friend who
  went by my side so many years: this full, fragile
  head of veined lavender. Oh that April
  that we first went with our stiff lusts
  leaving the city behind, out to the green hill--
  May, they said she was. A hand for all of us:
  this branch of blue butterflies tied to this stem.

  June is a yellow cup I'll not name; August
  the over-heavy one. And here are--
  russet and shiny, all but March. And March?
  Ah, March--
             Flowers are a tiresome pastime.
  One has a wish to shake them from their pots
  root and stern, for the sun to gnaw.

  Walk out again into the cold and saunter home
  to the fire. This day has blossomed long enough.
  I have wiped out the red night and lit a blaze
  instead which will at least warm our hands
  and stir up the talk.
                       I think we have kept fair time.
  Time is a green orchid.




APRIL


  If you had come away with me
  into another state
  we had been quiet together.
  But there the sun coming up
  out of the nothing beyond the lake was
  too low in the sky,
  there was too great a pushing
  against him,
  too much of sumac buds, pink
  in the head
  with the clear gum upon them,
  too many opening hearts of
  lilac leaves,
  too many, too many swollen
  limp poplar tassels on the
  bare branches!
  It was too strong in the air.
  I had no rest against that
  springtime!
  The pounding of the hoofs on the
  raw sods
  stayed with me half through the night.
  I awoke smiling but tired.




A GOODNIGHT


  Go to sleep--though of course you will not--
  to tideless waves thundering slantwise against
  strong embankments, rattle and swish of spray
  dashed thirty feet high, caught by the lake wind,
  scattered and strewn broadcast in over the steady
  car rails! Sleep, sleep! Gulls' cries in a wind-gust
  broken by the wind; calculating wings set above
  the field of waves breaking.
  Go to sleep to the lunge between foam-crests,
  refuse churned in the recoil. Food! Food!
  Offal! Offal! that holds them in the air, wave-white
  for the one purpose, feather upon feather, the wild
  chill in their eyes, the hoarseness in their voices--
  sleep, sleep....

  Gentlefooted crowds are treading out your lullaby.
  Their arms nudge, they brush shoulders,
  hitch this way then that, mass and surge at the crossings--
  lullaby, lullaby! The wild-fowl police whistles,
  the enraged roar of the traffic, machine shrieks:
  it is all to put you to sleep,
  to soften your limbs in relaxed postures,
  and that your head slip sidewise, and your hair loosen
  and fall over your eyes and over your mouth,
  brushing your lips wistfully that you may dream,
  sleep and dream--

  A black fungus springs out about lonely church doors--
  sleep, sleep. The Night, coming down upon
  the wet boulevard, would start you awake with his
  message, to have in at your window. Pay no
  heed to him. He storms at your sill with
  cooings, with gesticulations, curses!
  You will not let him in. He would keep you from sleeping.
  He would have you sit under your desk lamp
  brooding, pondering; he would have you
  slide out the drawer, take up the ornamented dagger
  and handle it. It is late, it is nineteen-nineteen--
  go to sleep, his cries are a lullaby;
  his jabbering is a sleep-well-my-baby; he is
  a crackbrained messenger.

  The maid waking you in the morning
  when you are up and dressing,
  the rustle of your clothes as you raise them--
  it is the same tune.
  At table the cold, greenish, split grapefruit, its juice
  on the tongue, the clink of the spoon in
  your coffee, the toast odors say it over and over.

  The open street-door lets in the breath of
  the morning wind from over the lake.
  The bus coming to a halt grinds from its sullen brakes--
  lullaby, lullaby. The crackle of a newspaper,
  the movement of the troubled coat beside you--
  sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep....
  It is the sting of snow, the burning liquor of
  the moonlight, the rush of rain in the gutters packed
  with dead leaves: go to sleep, go to sleep.
  And the night passes--and never passes--




OVERTURE TO A DANCE OF LOCOMOTIVES


I

  Men with picked voices chant the names
  of cities in a huge gallery: promises
  that pull through descending stairways
  to a deep rumbling.
                     The rubbing feet
  of those coming to be carried quicken a
  grey pavement into soft light that rocks
  to and fro, under the domed ceiling,
  across and across from pale
  earthcoloured walls of bare limestone.

  Covertly the hands of a great clock
  go round and round! Were they to
  move quickly and at once the whole
  secret would be out and the shuffling
  of all ants be done forever.

  A leaning pyramid of sunlight, narrowing
  out at a high window, moves by the clock:
  disaccordant hands straining out from
  a center: inevitable postures infinitely
  repeated--


II

  Two--twofour--twoeight!
  Porters in red hats run on narrow platforms.
  This way ma'm!
                --important not to take
  the wrong train!
                  Lights from the concrete
  ceiling hang crooked but--
                            Poised horizontal
  on glittering parallels the dingy cylinders
  packed with a warm glow--inviting entry--
  pull against the hour. But brakes can
  hold a fixed posture till--
                              The whistle!

  Not twoeight. Not twofour. Two!

  Gliding windows. Colored cooks sweating
  in a small kitchen. Taillights--

  In time: twofour!
  In time: twoeight!

  --rivers are tunneled: trestles
  cross oozy swampland: wheels repeating
  the same gesture remain relatively
  stationary: rails forever parallel
  return on themselves infinitely.
                                  The dance is sure.




ROMANCE MODERNE


  Tracks of rain and light linger in
  the spongy greens of a nature whose
  flickering mountain--bulging nearer,
  ebbing back into the sun
  hollowing itself away to hold a lake,--
  or brown stream rising and falling
  at the roadside, turning about,
  churning itself white, drawing
  green in over it,--plunging glassy funnels
  fall--
        And--the other world--
  the windshield a blunt barrier:
  Talk to me. Sh! they would hear us.
  --the backs of their heads facing us--
  The stream continues its motion of
  a hound running over rough ground.

  Trees vanish--reappear--vanish:
  detached dance of gnomes--as a talk
  dodging remarks, glows and fades.
  --The unseen power of words--
  And now that a few of the moves
  are clear the first desire is
  to fling oneself out at the side into
  the other dance, to other music.
  Peer Gynt. Rip Van Winkle. Diana.

  If I were young I would try a new alignment--
  alight nimbly from the car, Good-bye!--
  Childhood companions linked two and two
  criss-cross: four, three, two, one.
  Back into self, tentacles withdrawn.
  Feel about in warm self-flesh.
  Since childhood, since childhood!
  Childhood is a toad in the garden, a
  happy toad. All toads are happy
  and belong in gardens. A toad to Diana!

  Lean forward. Punch the steersman
  behind the ear. Twirl the wheel!
  Over the edge! Screams! Crash!
  The end. I sit above my head--
  a little removed--or
  a thin wash of rain on the roadway
  --I am never afraid when he is driving,--
  interposes new direction,
  rides us sidewise, unforseen
  into the ditch! All threads cut!
  Death! Black. The end. The very end--

  I would sit separate weighing a
  small red handful: the dirt of these parts,
  sliding mists sheeting the alders
  against the touch of fingers creeping
  to mine. All stuff of the blind emotions.
  But--stirred, the eye seizes
  for the first time--The eye awake!--
  anything, a dirt bank with green stars
  of scrawny weed flattened upon it under
  a weight of air--For the first time!--
  or a yawning depth: Big!
  Swim around in it, through it--
  all directions and find
  vitreous seawater stuff--
  God how I love you!--or, as I say,
  a plunge into the ditch. The end. I sit
  examining my red handful. Balancing
  --this--in and out--agh.

  Love you? It's
  a fire in the blood, willy-nilly!
  It's the sun coming up in the morning.
  Ha, but it's the grey moon too, already up
  in the morning. You are slow.
  Men are not friends where it concerns
  a woman? Fighters. Playfellows.
  White round thighs! Youth! Sighs--!
  It's the fillip of novelty. It's--

  Mountains. Elephants humping along
  against the sky--indifferent to
  light withdrawing its tattered shreds,
  worn out with embraces. It's
  the fillip of novelty. It's a fire in the blood.

  Oh get a flannel shirt, white flannel
  or pongee. You'd look so well!
  I married you because I liked your nose.
  I wanted you! I wanted you
  in spite of all they'd say--

  Rain and light, mountain and rain,
  rain and river. Will you love me always?
  --A car overturned and two crushed bodies
  under it.--Always! Always!
  And the white moon already up.
  White. Clean. All the colors.
  A good head, backed by the eye--awake!
  backed by the emotions--blind--
  River and mountain, light and rain--or
  rain, rock, light, trees--divided:
  rain-light counter rocks-trees or
  trees counter rain-light-rocks or--

  Myriads of counter processions
  crossing and recrossing, regaining
  the advantage, buying here, selling there
  --You are sold cheap everywhere in town!--
  lingering, touching fingers, withdrawing
  gathering forces into blares, hummocks,
  peaks and rivers--river meeting rock
  --I wish that you were lying there dead
  and I sitting here beside you.--
  It's the grey moon--over and over.
  It's the clay of these parts.




THE DESOLATE FIELD


  Vast and grey, the sky
  is a simulacrum
  to all but him whose days
  are vast and grey, and--
  In the tall, dried grasses
  a goat stirs
  with nozzle searching the ground.
  --my head is in the air
  but who am I...?
  And amazed my heart leaps
  at the thought of love
  vast and grey
  yearning silently over me.




WILLOW POEM


  It is a willow when summer is over,
  a willow by the river
  from which no leaf has fallen nor
  bitten by the sun
  turned orange or crimson.
  The leaves cling and grow paler,
  swing and grow paler
  over the swirling waters of the river
  as if loath to let go,
  they are so cool, so drunk with
  the swirl of the wind and of the river--
  oblivious to winter,
  the last to let go and fall
  into the water and on the ground.




APPROACH OF WINTER


  The half stripped trees
  struck by a wind together,
  bending all,
  the leaves flutter drily
  and refuse to let go
  or driven like hail
  stream bitterly out to one side
  and fall
  where the salvias, hard carmine,--
  like no leaf that ever was--
  edge the bare garden.




JANUARY


  Again I reply to the triple winds
  running chromatic fifths of derision
  outside my window:
                    Play louder.
  You will not succeed. I am
  bound more to my sentences
  the more you batter at me
  to follow you.
                And the wind,
  as before, fingers perfectly
  its derisive music.




BLIZZARD


  Snow:
  years of anger following
  hours that float idly down--
  the blizzard
  drifts its weight
  deeper and deeper for three days
  or sixty years, eh? Then
  the sun! a clutter of
  yellow and blue flakes--
  Hairy looking trees stand out
  in long alleys
  over a wild solitude.
  The man turns and there--
  his solitary track stretched out
  upon the world.




TO WAKEN AN OLD LADY


  Old age is
  a flight of small
  cheeping birds
  skimming
  bare trees
  above a snow glaze.
  Gaining and failing
  they are buffetted
  by a dark wind--
  But what?
  On harsh weedstalks
  the flock has rested,
  the snow
  is covered with broken
  seedhusks
  and the wind tempered
  by a shrill
  piping of plenty.




WINTER TREES


  All the complicated details
  of the attiring and
  the disattiring are completed!
  A liquid moon
  moves gently among
  the long branches.
  Thus having prepared their buds
  against a sure winter
  the wise trees
  stand sleeping in the cold.




COMPLAINT


  They call me and I go
  It is a frozen road
  past midnight, a dust
  of snow caught
  in the rigid wheeltracks.
  The door opens.
  I smile, enter and
  shake off the cold.
  Here is a great woman
  on her side in the bed.
  She is sick,
  perhaps vomiting,
  perhaps laboring
  to give birth to
  a tenth child. Joy! Joy!
  Night is a room
  darkened for lovers,
  through the jalousies the sun
  has sent one gold needle!
  I pick the hair from her eyes
  and watch her misery
  with compassion.




THE COLD NIGHT


  It is cold. The white moon
  is up among her scattered stars--
  like the bare thighs of
  the Police Seargent's wife--among
  her five children....
  No answer. Pale shadows lie upon
  the frosted grass. One answer:
  It is midnight, it is still
  and it is cold...!
  White thighs of the sky! a
  new answer out of the depths of
  my male belly: In April....
  In April I shall see again--In April!
  the round and perfect thighs
  of the Police Sergent's wife
  perfect still after many babies.
  Oya!




SPRING STORM


  The sky has given over
  its bitterness.
  Out of the dark change
  all day long
  rain falls and falls
  as if it would never end.
  Still the snow keeps
  its hold on the ground.
  But water, water
  from a thousand runnels!
  It collects swiftly,
  dappled with black
  cuts a way for itself
  through green ice in the gutters.
  Drop after drop it falls
  from the withered grass-stems
  of the overhanging embankment.




THE DELICACIES


  The hostess, in pink satin and blond hair--dressed
  high--shone beautifully in her white slippers against
  the great silent bald head of her little-eyed husband!
    Raising a glass of yellow Rhine wine in the narrow
  space just beyond the light-varnished woodwork and
  the decorative column between dining-room and hall,
  she smiled the smile of water tumbling from one ledge
  to another.

  We began with a herring salad: delicately flavoured
  saltiness in scallops of lettuce-leaves.

    The little owl-eyed and thick-set lady with masses
  of grey hair has smooth pink cheeks without a wrinkle.
  She cannot be the daughter of the little red-faced
  fellow dancing about inviting lion-headed Wolff the
  druggist to play the piano! But she is. Wolff is a
  terrific smoker: if the telephone goes off at night--so
  his curled-haired wife whispers--he rises from bed but
  cannot answer till he has lighted a cigarette.

    Sherry wine in little conical glasses, dull brownish
  yellow, and tomatoes stuffed with finely cut chicken
  and mayonnaise!

    The tall Irishman in a Prince Albert and the usual
  striped trousers is going to sing for us. (The piano
  is in a little alcove with dark curtains.) The hostess's
  sister--ten years younger than she--in black net and
  velvet, has hair like some filmy haystack, cloudy about
  the eyes. She will play for her husband.

    My wife is young, yes she is young and pretty when
  she cares to be--when she is interested in a discussion:
  it is the little dancing mayor's wife telling her of the
  Day nursery in East Rutherford, 'cross the track,
  divided from us by the railroad--and disputes as to
  precedence. It is in this town the saloon flourishes,
  the saloon of my friend on the right whose wife has
  twice offended with chance words. Her English is
  atrocious! It is in this town that the saloon is situated,
  close to the railroad track, close as may be, this side
  being dry, dry, dry: two people listening on opposite
  sides of a wall!--The Day Nursery had sixty-five
  babies the week before last, so my wife's eyes shine
  and her cheeks are pink and I cannot see a blemish.

    Ice-cream in the shape of flowers and domestic
  objects: a pipe for me since I do not smoke, a doll
  for you.

    The figure of some great bulk of a woman disappearing
  into the kitchen with a quick look over the
  shoulder. My friend on the left who has spent the
  whole day in a car the like of which some old fellow
  would give to an actress: flower-holders, mirrors,
  curtains, plush seats--my friend on the left who is
  chairman of the Streets committee of the town council--and
  who has spent the whole day studying automobile
  fire-engines in neighbouring towns in view of
  purchase,--my friend, at the Elks last week at the
  breaking-up hymn, signalled for them to let Bill--a
  familiar friend of the saloon-keeper--sing out all alone
  to the organ--and he did sing!

    Salz-rolls, exquisite! and Rhine wine _ad libitum_.
  A masterly caviare sandwich.

    The children flitting about above stairs. The
  councilman has just bought a National eight--some
  car!

    For heaven's sake I mustn't forget the halves of
  green peppers stuffed with cream cheese and whole
  walnuts!




THURSDAY


  I have had my dream--like others--
  and it has come to nothing, so that
  I remain now carelessly
  with feet planted on the ground
  and look up at the sky--
  feeling my clothes about me,
  the weight of my body in my shoes,
  the rim of my hat, air passing in and out
  at my nose--and decide to dream no more.




THE DARK DAY


  A three-day-long rain from the east--
  an interminable talking, talking
  of no consequence--patter, patter, patter.
  Hand in hand little winds
  blow the thin streams aslant.
  Warm. Distance cut off. Seclusion.
  A few passers-by, drawn in upon themselves,
  hurry from one place to another.
  Winds of the white poppy! there is no escape!--
  An interminable talking, talking,
  talking ... it has happened before.
  Backward, backward, backward.




TIME THE HANGMAN


  Poor old Abner, old white-haired nigger!
  I remember when you were so strong
  you hung yourself by a rope round the neck
  in Doc Hollister's barn to prove you could beat
  the faker in the circus--and it didn't kill you.
  Now your face is in your hands, and your elbows
  are on your knees, and you are silent and broken.




TO A FRIEND


  Well, Lizzie Anderson! seventeen men--and
  the baby hard to find a father for!

  What will the good Father in Heaven say
  to the local judge if he do not solve this problem?
  A little two pointed smile and--pouff!--
  the law is changed into a mouthful of phrases.




THE GENTLE MAN


  I feel the caress of my own fingers
  on my own neck as I place my collar
  and think pityingly
  of the kind women I have known.




THE SOUGHING WIND


  Some leaves hang late, some fall
  before the first frost--so goes
  the tale of winter branches and old bones.




SPRING


  O my grey hairs!
  You are truly white as plum blossoms.




PLAY


  Subtle, clever brain, wiser than I am,
  by what devious means do you contrive
  to remain idle? Teach me, O master.




LINES


  Leaves are greygreen,
  the glass broken, bright green.




THE POOR


  By constantly tormenting them
  with reminders of the lice in
  their children's hair, the
  School Physician first
  brought their hatred down on him,
  But by this familiarity
  they grew used to him, and so,
  at last,
  took him for their friend and adviser.




COMPLETE DESTRUCTION


  It was an icy day.
  We buried the cat,
  then took her box
  and set fire to it
  in the back yard.
  Those fleas that escaped
  earth and fire
  died by the cold.




MEMORY OF APRIL


  You say love is this, love is that:
  Poplar tassels, willow tendrils
  the wind and the rain comb,
  tinkle and drip, tinkle and drip--
  branches drifting apart. Hagh!
  Love has not even visited this country.




EPITAPH


  An old willow with hollow branches
  slowly swayed his few high bright tendrils
  and sang:

  Love is a young green willow
  shimmering at the bare wood's edge.




DAISY


  The dayseye hugging the earth
  in August, ha! Spring is
  gone down in purple,
  weeds stand high in the corn,
  the rainbeaten furrow
  is clotted with sorrel
  and crabgrass, the
  branch is black under
  the heavy mass of the leaves--
  The sun is upon a
  slender green stem
  ribbed lengthwise.
  He lies on his back--
  it is a woman also--
  he regards his former
  majesty and
  round the yellow center,
  split and creviced and done into
  minute flowerheads, he sends out
  his twenty rays--a little
  and the wind is among them
  to grow cool there!

  One turns the thing over
  in his hand and looks
  at it from the rear: brownedged,
  green and pointed scales
  armor his yellow.
  But turn and turn,
  the crisp petals remain
  brief, translucent, greenfastened,
  barely touching at the edges:
  blades of limpid seashell.




PRIMROSE


  Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow!
  It is not a color.
  It is summer!
  It is the wind on a willow,
  the lap of waves, the shadow
  under a bush, a bird, a bluebird,
  three herons, a dead hawk
  rotting on a pole--
  Clear yellow!
  It is a piece of blue paper
  in the grass or a threecluster of
  green walnuts swaying, children
  playing croquet or one boy
  fishing, a man
  swinging his pink fists
  as he walks--
  It is ladysthumb, forgetmenots
  in the ditch, moss under
  the flange of the carrail, the
  wavy lines in split rock, a
  great oaktree--
  It is a disinclination to be
  five red petals or a rose, it is
  a cluster of birdsbreast flowers
  on a red stem six feet high,
  four open yellow petals
  above sepals curled
  backward into reverse spikes--
  Tufts of purple grass spot the
  green meadow and clouds the sky.




QUEEN-ANN'S-LACE


  Her body is not so white as
  anemony petals nor so smooth--nor
  so remote a thing. It is a field
  of the wild carrot taking
  the field by force; the grass
  does not raise above it.
  Here is no question of whiteness,
  white as can be, with a purple mole
  at the center of each flower.
  Each flower is a hand's span
  of her whiteness. Wherever
  his hand has lain there is
  a tiny purple blemish. Each part
  is a blossom under his touch
  to which the fibres of her being
  stem one by one, each to its end,
  until the whole field is a
  white desire, empty, a single stem,
  a cluster, flower by flower,
  a pious wish to whiteness gone over--
  or nothing.




GREAT MULLEN


  One leaves his leaves at home
  being a mullen and sends up a lighthouse
  to peer from: I will have my way,
  yellow--A mast with a lantern, ten
  fifty, a hundred, smaller and smaller
  as they grow more--Liar, liar, liar!
  You come from her! I can smell djer-kiss
  on your clothes. Ha, ha! you come to me,
  you--I am a point of dew on a grass-stem.
  Why are you sending heat down on me
  from your lantern--You are cowdung, a
  dead stick with the bark off. She is
  squirting on us both. She has had her
  hand on you!--Well?--She has defiled
  ME.--Your leaves are dull, thick
  and hairy.--Every hair on my body will
  hold you off from me. You are a
  dungcake, birdlime on a fencerail.--
  I love you, straight, yellow
  finger of God pointing to--her!
  Liar, broken weed, duncake, you have--
  I am a cricket waving his antenae
  and you are high, grey and straight. Ha!




WAITING


  When I am alone I am happy.
  The air is cool. The sky is
  flecked and splashed and wound
  with color. The crimson phalloi
  of the sassafrass leaves
  hang crowded before me
  in shoals on the heavy branches.
  When I reach my doorstep
  I am greeted by
  the happy shrieks of my children
  and my heart sinks.
  I am crushed.

  Are not my children as dear to me
  as falling leaves or
  must one become stupid
  to grow older?
  It seems much as if Sorrow
  had tripped up my heels.
  Let us see, let us see!
  What did I plan to say to her
  when it should happen to me
  as it has happened now?




THE HUNTER


  In the flashes and black shadows
  of July
  the days, locked in each other's arms,
  seem still
  so that squirrels and colored birds
  go about at ease over
  the branches and through the air.

  Where will a shoulder split or
  a forehead open and victory be?

  Nowhere.
  Both sides grow older.

  And you may be sure
  not one leaf will lift itself
  from the ground
  and become fast to a twig again.




ARRIVAL


  And yet one arrives somehow,
  finds himself loosening the hooks of
  her dress
  in a strange bedroom--
  feels the autumn
  dropping its silk and linen leaves
  about her ankles.
  The tawdry veined body emerges
  twisted upon itself
  like a winter wind...!




TO A FRIEND CONCERNING SEVERAL LADIES


  You know there is not much
  that I desire, a few crysanthemums
  half lying on the grass, yellow
  and brown and white, the
  talk of a few people, the trees,
  an expanse of dried leaves perhaps
  with ditches among them.
  But there comes
  between me and these things
  a letter
  or even a look--well placed,
  you understand,
  so that I am confused, twisted
  four ways and--left flat,
  unable to lift the food to
  my own mouth:
  Here is what they say: Come!
  and come! and come! And if
  I do not go I remain stale to
  myself and if I go--
                      I have watched
  the city from a distance at night
  and wondered why I wrote no poem.
  Come! yes,
  the city is ablaze for you
  and you stand and look at it.

  And they are right. There is
  no good in the world except out of
  a woman and certain women alone
  for certain things. But what if
  I arrive like a turtle
  with my house on my back or
  a fish ogling from under water?
  It will not do. I must be
  steaming with love, colored
  like a flamingo. For what?
  To have legs and a silly head
  and to smell, pah! like a flamingo
  that soils its own feathers behind.
  Must I go home filled
  with a bad poem?
  And they say:
  Who can answer these things
  till he has tried? Your eyes
  are half closed, you are a child,
  oh, a sweet one, ready to play
  but I will make a man of you and
  with love on his shoulder--!

  And in the marshes
  the crickets run
  on the sunny dike's top and
  make burrows there, the water
  reflects the reeds and the reeds
  move on their stalks and rattle drily.




YOUTH AND BEAUTY


  I bought a dishmop--
  having no daughter--
  for they had twisted
  fine ribbons of shining copper
  about white twine
  and made a towsled head
  of it, fastened it
  upon a turned ash stick
  slender at the neck
  straight, tall--
  when tied upright
  on the brass wallbracket
  to be a light for me--
  and naked,
  as a girl should seem
  to her father.




THE THINKER


  My wife's new pink slippers
  have gay pom-poms.
  There is not a spot or a stain
  on their satin toes or their sides.
  All night they lie together
  under her bed's edge.
  Shivering I catch sight of them
  and smile, in the morning.
  Later I watch them
  descending the stair,
  hurrying through the doors
  and round the table,
  moving stiffly
  with a shake of their gay pom-poms!
  And I talk to them
  in my secret mind
  out of pure happiness.




THE DISPUTANTS


  Upon the table in their bowl
  in violent disarray
  of yellow sprays, green spikes
  of leaves, red pointed petals
  and curled heads of blue
  and white among the litter
  of the forks and crumbs and plates
  the flowers remain composed.
  Cooly their colloquy continues
  above the coffee and loud talk
  grown frail as vaudeville.




TULIP BED


  The May sun--whom
  all things imitate--
  that glues small leaves to
  the wooden trees
  shone from the sky
  through bluegauze clouds
  upon the ground.
  Under the leafy trees
  where the suburban streets
  lay crossed,
  with houses on each corner,
  tangled shadows had begun
  to join
  the roadway and the lawns.
  With excellent precision
  the tulip bed
  inside the iron fence
  upreared its gaudy
  yellow, white and red,
  rimmed round with grass,
  reposedly.




THE BIRDS


  The world begins again!
  Not wholly insufflated
  the blackbirds in the rain
  upon the dead topbranches
  of the living tree,
  stuck fast to the low clouds,
  notate the dawn.
  Their shrill cries sound
  announcing appetite
  and drop among the bending roses
  and the dripping grass.




THE NIGHTINGALES


  My shoes as I lean
  unlacing them
  stand out upon
  flat worsted flowers
  under my feet.
  Nimbly the shadows
  of my fingers play
  unlacing
  over shoes and flowers.




SPOUTS


  In this world of
  as fine a pair of breasts
  as ever I saw
  the fountain in
  Madison Square
  spouts up of water
  a white tree
  that dies and lives
  as the rocking water
  in the basin
  turns from the stonerim
  back upon the jet
  and rising there
  reflectively drops down again.




BLUEFLAGS


  I stopped the car
  to let the children down
  where the streets end
  in the sun
  at the marsh edge
  and the reeds begin
  and there are small houses
  facing the reeds
  and the blue mist
  in the distance
  with grapevine trellises
  with grape clusters
  small as strawberries
  on the vines
  and ditches
  running springwater
  that continue the gutters
  with willows over them.
  The reeds begin
  like water at a shore
  their pointed petals waving
  dark green and light.
  But blueflags are blossoming
  in the reeds
  which the children pluck
  chattering in the reeds
  high over their heads
  which they part
  with bare arms to appear
  with fists of flowers
  till in the air
  there comes the smell
  of calamus
  from wet, gummy stalks.




THE WIDOW'S LAMENT IN SPRINGTIME


  Sorrow is my own yard
  where the new grass
  flames as it has flamed
  often before but not
  with the cold fire
  that closes round me this year.
  Thirtyfive years
  I lived with my husband.
  The plumtree is white today
  with masses of flowers.
  Masses of flowers
  load the cherry branches
  and color some bushes
  yellow and some red
  but the grief in my heart
  is stronger than they
  for though they were my joy
  formerly, today I notice them
  and turn away forgetting.
  Today my son told me
  that in the meadows,
  at the edge of the heavy woods
  in the distance, he saw
  trees of white flowers.
  I feel that I would like
  to go there
  and fall into those flowers
  and sink into the marsh near them.




LIGHT HEARTED WILLIAM


  Light hearted William twirled
  his November moustaches
  and, half dressed, looked
  from the bedroom window
  upon the spring weather.

  Heigh-ya! sighed he gaily
  leaning out to see
  up and down the street
  where a heavy sunlight
  lay beyond some blue shadows.

  Into the room he drew
  his head again and laughed
  to himself quietly
  twirling his green moustaches.




PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR


  The birches are mad with green points
  the wood's edge is burning with their green,
  burning, seething--No, no, no.
  The birches are opening their leaves one
  by one. Their delicate leaves unfold cold
  and separate, one by one. Slender tassels
  hang swaying from the delicate branch tips--
  Oh, I cannot say it. There is no word.
  Black is split at once into flowers. In
  every bog and ditch, flares of
  small fire, white flowers!--Agh,
  the birches are mad, mad with their green.
  The world is gone, torn into shreds
  with this blessing. What have I left undone
  that I should have undertaken

  O my brother, you redfaced, living man
  ignorant, stupid whose feet are upon
  this same dirt that I touch--and eat.
  We are alone in this terror, alone,
  face to face on this road, you and I,
  wrapped by this flame!
  Let the polished plows stay idle,
  their gloss already on the black soil.
  But that face of yours--!
  Answer me. I will clutch you. I
  will hug you, grip you. I will poke my face
  into your face and force you to see me.
  Take me in your arms, tell me the commonest
  thing that is in your mind to say,
  say anything. I will understand you--!
  It is the madness of the birch leaves opening
  cold, one by one.

  My rooms will receive me. But my rooms
  are no longer sweet spaces where comfort
  is ready to wait on me with its crumbs.
  A darkness has brushed them. The mass
  of yellow tulips in the bowl is shrunken.
  Every familiar object is changed and dwarfed.
  I am shaken, broken against a might
  that splits comfort, blows apart
  my careful partitions, crushes my house
  and leaves me--with shrinking heart
  and startled, empty eyes--peering out
  into a cold world.

  In the spring I would drink! In the spring
  I would be drunk and lie forgetting all things.
  Your face! Give me your face, Yang Kue Fei!
  your hands, your lips to drink!
  Give me your wrists to drink--
  I drag you, I am drowned in you, you
  overwhelm me! Drink!
  Save me! The shad bush is in the edge
  of the clearing. The yards in a fury
  of lilac blossoms are driving me mad with terror.
  Drink and lie forgetting the world.

  And coldly the birch leaves are opening one by one.
  Coldly I observe them and wait for the end.
  And it ends.




THE LONELY STREET


  School is over. It is too hot
  to walk at ease. At ease
  in light frocks they walk the streets
  to while the time away.
  They have grown tall. They hold
  pink flames in their right hands.
  In white from head to foot,
  with sidelong, idle look--
  in yellow, floating stuff,
  black sash and stockings--
  touching their avid mouths
  with pink sugar on a stick--
  like a carnation each holds in her hand--
  they mount the lonely street.




THE GREAT FIGURE


  Among the rain
  and lights
  I saw the figure 5
  in gold
  on a red
  firetruck
  moving
  with weight and urgency
  tense
  unheeded
  to gong clangs
  siren howls
  and wheels rumbling
  through the dark city.











Sometimes smoke in the June dusk`Reminds me of fire-lit arms Feathered by an ash-blown breezeFlickering around each other My father's armsMy armsYoursI could never look you in the eyesCould never look into the sunSettling into the broad branches that sheltered usYou always kept a quiet place for me   I bought a lathe todayTo shave down the hours To a more manageable sizeTo carve out a space in the daysTo build a home from raw wood and sawdust I spent October on the slopes of Catoctin MountainDeep in the underbrushIn hollowed-out tree trunksI oaked and ached for youMy acorn hopesI turned red with the leavesCrumbledshookand fell I thought I wanted a life suffused in sunlightLeaf-lockedLit by golden fingers prying throughShade-strewnBreeze-kissedHideawaysCurlawaysBut we sat in silence Amid the darkening hillsIn the hush of soft-winged thrushesBlue-beakedChatteringGive us your soft, secret murmursGive us the low, ceaseless murmur of the seaEar-tickling cinnamon winds whispering distant susurrations  MurmurationsAnd thenthere        on a whimThe flock of themRipple and risingSpiring upRiding on Gliding on Hot columns of airtherewhere the breezes gently touchingCaressingGently rushingThrough the feathers of the birdsReady to hurl themStridingThrough the feathers of the air[key change]    A hundred tons of shells Drifting downA steel rainSteel magnoliasBlooming in the humid airAll thisFor a feint at the bluffLooming over the riverA feint, a bluffBut still the smoke roseAnd hung like mistAnd clung like laceTo the neck of the ridgelineTo the clefts in the cliffs Where the avalanche ambles down the slopesShe swung around the bagswing tree MagnoliaThe one in the front yardThe ugly one her father tried to cut downEvery year  With its helicopter leavesAnd roots that cracked the sidewalk And “that damn bird” that never stopped chirping Until it did She sank back into the shade of the years away from home She wasn’t there when the branches fellWasn’t there to watch her father grow smaller than he’d ever beenShe came back now only to clean up the leaves clumping in the yard I wish I had hands like knotted pines Standing strong against the wind      stillholding their own But mine are never still Instead they're willow-windBreeze-blown Fickle and flightyThey bother me nightlyI've got the knotsBut mine are gnarledNot the age-grownSlow-built barkOf pines and oaks I want hands hewn from redwoodsSandstone carved      stillsmelling of sawdust. A bull mastiff strolled in next door to our familyA gunmetal thunderhead on the riverAnd when our father cut the tree that fell on the power linesIt severed our family instead For weeks, I glued mollusks to my body  I wanted to snail-shell myselfBut as soon as I walked inThey saw through me A smile slid inside Opening me up Shucking meShelling meThey found me nonetheless   So I grafted my bones with barkTransplanting myself I want there to be a future beyond these tea leavesBeyond these palms steeped in steam bathsYou trace your finger along my veinsAlong these lines on my foreheadReading a future bound by the horizons in this bodyThis bone boxTracing the knots in my chestMy trunk, neck, and nest of memoriesEvery night I run my finger along these branching lines on my palmLooking for a self beyond this selfLooking for my roots We’re not the people we thought we’d beLiving a stranger’s lifeWaking up in a stranger’s bed Brake lights leeringLong shadows in subway tunnelsMelted snow Dripping steadilyDown concrete wallsOn strange streetsIn new citiesAt night  I remember how she rode in triumph through the streets Held high by swaybacked supplicantsUnder blue skies consumed by the horizonWe adorned herWith roses We garlanded her We adored herAnd mourned for her lossAnd bore her aloft On gold-embossed carriagesUnder sun­struck clouds of slate greyTrailing her fine, feathered filigreeFilling the streets with fall-fluttering Gutter-strewn flowersI never knew herThe way she wasIn the hush Of butterflies hovering We blushedFor the yellow years Away from herWe hoisted her highHer memoryHer majestyAnd pressed on, pacingProcessing in faithAs the last remaining daylight Hissed and sighedFlickering across the wallsWe lowered her at the church door The sky behind usPeriwinkling usWrapped us in velvetWe planted her in the small plotsBehind the churchAnd carried what was left of her home with us [key change]   I remember the night I drownedAs your bedroom filled with brineSpilling out of the wallsI was your ballastStrangled by seaweed and the salt sprayYou sunk meAnd when the morning came, you poured me out There was a summer I whitecappedDraped in his sun-drenched arms  Our tongues tickled and tastingRaw wisps of salt-licking airWhere the waves crash poundinglySeek houndingly His flesh-foamed skin Wind-tossedCanvas unfurled above usI billowed into himCareeringIn the onrushing, crash-crushing breakers The summer we leaned into the windOr I dreamed we did                              My windshield wipers count the days The mile markers driving me Flicker-litThey flanked me They brought you back to me Lusty-armedBroad-backedYour lips glittering with whispers and wine    Your laugh linesThe way we never were  We were planting tomatoes when he turned to me The soil’s too hard Or so he saidAs if my skin were made of dirt Harboring leaves and larval seedsAnd roots that wrap deep around my organsHe reached into the dirt with grubby fingersRooting past rough-barked bonesRasping my spine with rusted trowelsNow, out of my limbs have sprouted tall square stemsFull of flax and fiber Stems that he watered forWaited forBut my roots run deepLushIn leaf-loamGushing He blew out feathery cloudsFlappingRoosting in the wallsIn our hairIn the roofThey got tangled in the curtainsAnd swoop down again sometimesLike the night he told me I should leave himBefore I got too old to find someone elseI think I wove myself into my nest Dreaming myself emergingFrom skin like salted husksPeeling back for one anotherReleasing the songs in our chest,Lumps in our throat,Cracks in our hipsKnucklesAnd the spines we strung up in our closetThreatening to come out You come home now to a houseWhere honey leaks from the outletsThere’s lead in the wallsLead in the waterPets buried in the basementAnd the whole thing buzzingWith the bees that moved into the wallsWhen your roommates moved outWe lay thereStillTangled in all of our limbs and longingFor different thingsFor vines to rupture the floorboardsFor vegetable carpets Sometimes honey leaks out of my wallsOut of the high hallwaysLeafing with laughterLost in the last light'sLong light’s gasp. I’ve planted myself in new soil too often latelyRepeatedly ripping up my own rootsAnd carrying them with leafy hands to new plotsWaiting to be watered and sown with hopeThis time I wrapped us up neatlyIn wax paper and twineTubers and seed packetsPrimly labeled with Latin namesI dug holes for us, too big for our seeds, and too small for the trees we’d grow intoFirmly entrenched, surrounded by the seeds of past livesWe grew steadily, ring by ringWith bramble-brandishing branches grasping for the sky.





